Draft version March 12, 2025
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX631

arXiv:2412.08601v2 [astro-ph.IM] 11 Mar 2025

CCSNscore: A multi-input deep learning tool for classification of core-collapse supernovae using
SED-Machine spectra
Yashvi Sharma ,1 Ashish A. Mahabal ,1, 2 Jesper Sollerman ,3 Christoffer Fremling ,4
S. R. Kulkarni ,1 Nabeel Rehemtulla ,5, 6 Adam A. Miller ,7, 6 Marie Aubert,8 Tracy X. Chen ,9
Michael W. Coughlin ,10 Matthew J. Graham ,1 David Hale,4 Mansi M. Kasliwal ,1 Young-Lo Kim ,11
James D. Neill ,4 Josiah N. Purdum ,4 Ben Rusholme ,9 Avinash Singh ,3 and Niharika Sravan12
1 Division of Physics, Mathematics and Astronomy, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
2 Center for Data Driven Discovery, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
3 Department of Astronomy, The Oskar Klein Center, Stockholm University, AlbaNova, 10691 Stockholm, Sweden
4 Caltech Optical Observatories, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
5 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208, USA
6 Center for Interdisciplinary Exploration and Research in Astrophysics (CIERA), Northwestern University, 1800 Sherman Ave,

Evanston, IL 60201, USA
7 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Rd, Evanston, IL 60208, USA
8 Université Clermont Auvergne, CNRS/IN2P3, LPCA, F-63000 Clermont-Ferrand, France
9 IPAC, California Institute of Technology, 1200 E. California Blvd, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
10 School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA
11 Department of Physics, Lancaster University, Lancs LA1 4YB, UK
12 Department of Physics, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA

ABSTRACT
Supernovae (SNe) come in various flavors and are classified into different types based on emission
and absorption lines in their spectra. SN candidates are now abundant with the advent of large
systematic sky surveys like the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF), however, the identification bottleneck
lies in their spectroscopic confirmation and classification. Fully robotic telescopes with dedicated
spectrographs optimized for SN follow-up have eased the burden of data acquisition. However, the
task of classifying the spectra still largely rests with the astronomers. Automating this classification
step reduces human effort and can make the SN type available sooner to the public. For this purpose, we
have developed a deep-learning based program for classifying core-collapse supernovae (CCSNe) with
ultra-low resolution spectra from the SED-Machine spectrograph on the Palomar 60-inch telescope.
The program consists of hierarchical classification task layers, with each layer composed of multiple
binary classifiers running in parallel to produce a reliable classification. The binary classifiers utilize
RNN and CNN architecture and are designed to take multiple inputs to supplement spectra with g- and
r-band photometry from ZTF. On non-host-contaminated and good quality SEDM spectra (“gold” test
set) of CCSNe, CCSNscore is ∼94% accurate in distinguishing between hydrogen-rich (Type II) and
hydrogen-poor (Type Ibc) CCSNe. With light curve input, CCSNscore classifies ∼ 83% of the gold set
with high confidence (score ≥ 0.8 and score-error < 0.05), with ∼ 98% accuracy. Based on SNIascore’s
and CCSNscore’s real-time performance on bright transients (mpk ≤ 18.5) and our reporting criteria,
we expect ∼ 0.5% (∼ 4) true SNe Ia to be misclassified as SNe Ibc and ∼ 6% (∼ 17) of true CCSNe
to be misclassified between Type II and Type Ibc annually on the Transient Name Server.
1. INTRODUCTION

Corresponding author: Yashvi Sharma
yssharma@astrocaltech.edu

Wide-field optical transient surveys are already finding supernova (SN) candidates in record numbers
(Shappee et al. 2014, ASAS-SN; Chambers et al. 2016,
PS1; Tonry et al. 2018, ATLAS; Bellm et al. 2019; Graham et al. 2019; Dekany et al. 2020, ZTF) which will
increase by tenfold in the era of the Rubin Observatory (Ivezić et al. 2019). A supernova candidate be-

2

Sharma et al.

coming a secure SN identification involves many steps.
Taking the example of ZTF, the transient ‘alerts’ from
ZTF (Patterson et al. 2019) are filtered by alert management frameworks (e.g. Fritz (van der Walt et al. 2019;
Coughlin et al. 2023), AMPEL (Nordin et al. 2019), etc.)
to obtain potential SN candidates from the slurry of
transients, variable stars, moving solar system objects,
and bogus artifacts. These candidates are visually inspected for spectroscopic follow-up candidates; however,
this step can be automated depending on survey needs
as demonstrated in Rehemtulla et al. (2024) (BTSbot).
Finally, the selected candidates are assigned to various
telescope facilities to obtain secure spectroscopic classifications, but as follow-up resources are limited, this step
becomes the primary bottleneck. Still, dedicated SN
classification instruments and programs (e.g., Ben-Ami
et al. 2012; Blagorodnova et al. 2018, SEDM; Smartt
et al. 2015, ePESSTO; Howell 2019, The Global Supernova Project) take spectra of a few thousand SNe
per year, which are then analyzed by astronomers, assigned a classification and then sent to the Transient
Name Server (TNS1 ). Some programs exist that are
meant to support astronomers in the manual SN classification task, such as SuperNova IDentification software (SNID; Blondin & Tonry 2007), Superfit (Howell et al. 2005), NGSF (Goldwasser et al. 2022), Gelato
(Harutyunyan et al. 2008), all based on either template
cross-correlation techniques (Tonry & Davis 1979) or
minimization algorithms. These programs often require
user input (initial guesses for redshift, age, restriction
of parameter search ranges, etc.) to obtain correct classifications. Still, they can be less effective because of
host contamination (in SNID) or poor signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Moreover, template-matching techniques are
slow to run on thousands of spectra, suffer from typeattractor issues if one kind of template dominates the
template bank, and are less accurate when automated
(Kim et al. 2024). With the advent of deep learning
techniques and the dedicated influx of spectral data, sophisticated deep learning-based models can be trained
to automatically and reliably classify the most common
SN types. Muthukrishna et al. (2019) presented DASH
(Deep Learning for the Automated Spectral Classification of Supernovae and their Hosts), trained on SNID
template dataset (which contains intermediate resolution spectra) and tested on the OzDES (Yuan et al. 2015;
Childress et al. 2017) dataset, also from intermediate
resolution (R ∼ 1400) spectrographs. Though DASH
showed promising performance on the OzDES test set
1 https://www.wis-tns.org/

and is easy to install and use, it did not perform well
on ultra-low resolution spectra (R ∼ 100) when tested
in Fremling et al. (2021); Kim et al. (2024).
Thus, SNIascore (Fremling et al. 2021) – a deeplearning based binary classifier was developed specifically for classifying SNe Ia using the spectra taken by
SED-Machine (Ben-Ami et al. 2012; Blagorodnova et al.
2018; Rigault et al. 2019; Kim et al. 2022), an ultralow resolution (R∼ 100) IFU spectrograph operating
in the optical wavelength range (3800 Å – 9150 Å) on
the fully robotic Palomar 60-in telescope (P60; Cenko
et al. 2006). The need for SNIascore was motivated
by the ZTF Bright Transient Survey (BTS; Fremling
et al. 2020; Perley et al. 2020; Rehemtulla et al. 2024);
a flux-limited survey to spectroscopically classify bright
transients (mpeak < 18.5) detected by ZTF with > 90%
completeness. With SEDM’s resolution on the moderate
aperture of P60, it is uniquely suited for bright transient
classification and thus became the main workhorse instrument for BTS, as well as the top classifier on TNS.
SNIascore was optimized to classify SNe Ia with more
than 90% accuracy at less than 0.6% false positive rate
(FPR), and with this performance automated half of
the manual classification workload for BTS. SNIascore
has allowed BTS to send robust SN Ia classifications
to the TNS within ∼ 11 minutes of acquisition. Together, BTSbot and SNIascore enabled the first fully automatic end-to-end discovery and classification of an optical transient (Rehemtulla et al. 2023).
As (normal) SNe Ia are quite homogeneous in their
spectral and photometric properties, it is a binary
classification problem suited for deep learning. Also,
SNe Ia are the most abundant type of supernova identified in flux-limited surveys like BTS, thus providing a
large sample sufficient for training deep learning models.
Core-collapse (CC) supernovae, however, are more heterogeneous, with some CCSNe even transitioning to a
different spectral type over time or developing late-time
interaction signatures (Milisavljevic et al. 2015; Chen
et al. 2018; Sollerman et al. 2020; Sharma et al. 2024;
Kangas et al. 2024). In BTS (Perley et al. 2020), the
most abundant class among CCSNe is the hydrogenrich Type II SNe (∼ 72%) followed by the hydrogenpoor Type I or stripped-envelope SNe (SESNe). Within
the hydrogen-rich Type II class, the most common
(∼ 76%) are the spectroscopically “normal” subtypes
(SNe IIP/L) showing strong P-Cygni Balmer line profiles, with the rest (SNe IIb, IIn, and SLSN-II) contributing ∼ 24% combined. Within the Type I SESNe,
SNe Ibc consitute ∼ 59%, SNe Ic-BL make up ∼ 19%,
SLSN-I are ∼ 13% and the rest are the rare SNe Ibn and
SNe Icn (SN subtype fractions referenced from Perley

3
et al. 2020). This is a highly unbalanced dataset with the
rarer subtypes only having a handful of examples, not
nearly enough for training a deep-learning model. The
problem is compounded by varying levels of noise in the
spectra and the classification being inherently difficult
for some subtypes with ultra-low resolution spectra (for
example, the ‘n’ in IIn and Ibn refers to ‘narrow’ spectral lines of ∼ 100 km s−1 , impossible to resolve with a
resolution of R ∼ 100). For these reasons, developing a
high-performing and reliable automated spectral classifier for CCSNe using just the SEDM data is challenging.
This work attempts to face this challenge and presents
a deep learning-based program – CCSNscore, designed
specifically for CCSN classification, trained with SEDM
spectral data, Open SN Catalog (Guillochon et al. 2017)
spectral data, and ZTF photometry. The data preparation and preprocessing are described in §2, the application structure and model architecture are described in
§3, the training and optimization process is outlined in
§4 and the performance on the test set is detailed in
§5. We explore the limitations and caveats of this tool
in §7. The CCSNscore software, trained models presented in this paper, and the metadata of training and
test datasets are available on the GitHub repository of
CCSNscore.
2. DATASET

Initially, we started our study with the SEDM spectra of BTS transients used in Fremling et al. (2021) for
SNIascore that are not SNe Ia (‘non-Ia’) and collected
between March 2018 and August 2020. We kept the
BTS sample spectra published in Fremling et al. (2020)
in the test set along with the spectra of a few peculiar CCSNe and put the rest in the training set. We
made sure that all spectra belonging to a transient were
present in only one of the sets. We updated the dataset
a few times as more spectra were collected through BTS,
until March 2024. We also added optical spectra from
the Open SN Catalog and resampled them to match the
resolution of the SEDM spectra. Because we wanted
to test the performance primarily on SEDM data, we
put all of the Open SN Catalog spectra of SNe that had
an unambiguous and non-peculiar classification in the
training set. Then, we split the newer SEDM spectra of
ZTF transients into training and test sets such that the
final ratio of test samples to training samples per major
subtype would be between 10% to 30%. We put most
of the stripped-envelope SNe with ambiguous subtype
(Type Ib/c) in the test set.
There are 8563 unique spectra in our training set,
of which 3015 are SEDM spectra of 1222 unique ZTF
transients and 5548 are Open SN Catalog spectra of

1546 unique transients. The training data consists of
a broad range of spectral quality, from poor to great
SNR (excluding extremely noisy cases), various levels of
host galaxy contamination, and various strengths of the
emission and absorption features (including completely
featureless spectra), so that the models can learn to expect all kinds of observed data and do not overfit on
only good quality of data. The test data containing
1535 SEDM spectra also shows this wide variety of spectral quality. To assess the model performance on good
vs. bad (unclassifiable or difficult to classify) quality
spectra, we split the test data into “gold” and “bronze”
categories semi-automatically through a combination of
parameter thresholding and visual inspection. The classifiability of a spectrum depends not just on the noise
and SNR but also on the presence of broad supernova
features (or similarity to SNe), which SNID encapsulates well. We found that the number of “good” SNID
matches with an 2 rlap > 4 (referred to as numSN ID
henceforth) serves well as a discriminator for gold vs.
bronze split. We found numSN ID ≥ 20 appropriate for crudely separating spectra with clear supernova
features and decent SNR. Next, we visually inspected
all Type Ibc (hydrogen-poor) spectra in the test sample to identify spectra with severe host contamination.
If the host galaxy has strong typical narrow emission
lines (Hα, O III), they show up as blended emission
lines in SEDM spectra due to the ultra-low resolution
and appear just like the features of a SN II or SN IIn
in SEDM spectra, making automatic identification of
the host-contaminated Type Ibc SNe extremely difficult.
We keep all of the visually identified host-contaminated
samples in the bronze set. Finally, the gold (bronze)
test set has a total of 780 (755) SEDM spectra of 431
(369) unique ZTF transients. The split comes out to be
nearly 50%.
The properties of the (non-augmented) training and
test set samples are shown in Figure 1. From the subtype distribution plots in Figure 1 (top row), it is immediately obvious that there is a significant imbalance between the subsamples of the hydrogen-rich (Type II) and
the hydrogen-poor (Type Ibc) SNe. To correct this imbalance, we augment the data with fake spectra for each
subtype by randomly choosing pairs of samples (of that
subtype) around similar ages, transforming their wavelengths to rest-frame (deredshifting), and taking their
weighted average (random weights). The number of fake
samples to create per subtype can be chosen during the
data preprocessing step. The fake samples are added
2 rlap is a SNID parameter indicating the goodness of a template

fit

4

Sharma et al.

Figure 1. Distribution of properties of the training and test sets (gold and bronze). The first row contains pie charts depicting
the highly imbalanced distribution of samples by CCSN subtype. The next four rows depict the property distribution for
hydrogen-rich (Type II in blue) and hydrogen-poor (Type Ibc in red) SN samples separately, with the second row showing
spectral phase distribution, the third row showing the distribution of the number of spectra per unique SN, the fourth row
showing redshift distribution of the unique SNe and the fifth row showing the peak apparent magnitude distribution of unique
SNe. The mean values of all distributions are marked with dotted vertical lines.

5
to the real data to balance the distribution of training
samples across categories for a given classification task.
The second row of Figure 1 shows the spectral phase
(days from maximum brightness at the time of spectral observation) distribution. The time of maximum
brightness is not always equal to the peak brightness of
the SN as photometric coverage is sparse for many SNe
in the dataset, often missing the rise and the peak. The
mean (sigma-clipped) of the H-rich SNe phase distribution is around the maximum brightness while it is after
the maximum brightness for the H-poor SNe phase distribution for all three sets (training, gold test, bronze
test). The standard deviation of the H-rich distribution
is also higher than the H-poor distribution for all three
sets, which reflects the naturally longer duration of Hrich SNe resulting in more follow-up observations. The
third row of Figure 1 depicts the distribution of the number of spectra per unique supernova, the mean of which
is centered around 2–3 spectra per SN. The training set
has more SNe with thorough spectral series data (> 10
spectra) owing to the dataset from the Open SN Catalog. The test sets, being exclusively SEDM only have
< 10 SNe per set that have ≥ 10 spectra, not significant
to affect the performance. These multiple spectra also
probe various levels of noise, effects of varying sky background, and age of the SNe and thus in a way are unique
to the models. The fourth and fifth rows show the redshift and peak apparent magnitude distributions of the
unique SNe. The redshifts are of the host-galaxy of the
SNe when available through the NED database or derived from the SNe classification spectra. The peak apparent magnitude distribution shown in the last row of
Figure 1 is highly dependent on the photometric coverage quality as mentioned earlier. The peak magnitudes
were obtained from the BTS sample explorer page when
available or derived from the interpolated light curves.
The distributions center around 18 mag, and for the test
data drop sharply around 19 mag as that is the maximum depth attainable by SEDM for reasonable exposure
times.
To further help with the classification task, we added
the capability to use ZTF g- and r-band light curves
(Masci et al. 2019) as additional input channels. The
light curves can be supplied as fixed-length flux arrays
where the fluxes are taken from the first detection of the
transient in ZTF to a set number of days (by default 200
days past first detection). The fixed length of arrays is a
requirement of the model architecture. Both the SEDM
spectra and ZTF light curves were queried from the dynamic user interfaces, the GROWTH Marshal (Kasliwal
et al. 2019) and Fritz (van der Walt et al. 2019; Coughlin et al. 2023). No light curve information is currently

supplied with the Open SN catalog spectra. We also
added another method of providing the light curves by
transforming them into “δm − δt” phase space (Mahabal et al. 2017). The δm − δt representation takes all
pairs of light curve points and maps them to a 2D space
with the y-axis being the magnitude difference and the
x-axis being the time difference (in days) between the
two points. This 2D space can potentially capture the
different rise and decline rates of various subtypes. The
program offers optional usage of these additional channels for training. Further details on data preprocessing
are described in the sections below. Figure 2 shows examples of input data samples for the various subtypes. A
data “sample” in this study refers to one spectrum with
its corresponding g, r light curves, and their δm−δt representations. Note that there can be multiple spectra of
the same supernova but each spectrum is counted as an
individual sample. We have split the Type IIb class into
‘IIb-H’ (spectra at phases in which Hα P-Cygni dominates) and ‘IIb-noH’ (spectra at phases when the Hα
feature has weakened and turned towards the nebular
phase) to put in the H-rich and H-poor classes. Except the IIn and IIb-noH examples all shown examples
are representative of spectra taken near peak-light and
are good quality, not host-contaminated SEDM spectra that show strong and clear SN features. However,
as mentioned earlier, the training samples span a wide
range of SNR and SN feature strengths.
2.1. Preprocessing
2.1.1. Optical spectra
All spectra are deredshifted using the redshifts obtained from the GROWTH Marshal and Fritz for
ZTF transients and the Open SN Catalog for the rest.
Though SEDM spectra cover the wavelength range between 3700 Å and 9200 Å the bluest part of the spectra
have been observed to be noisy. Therefore, we restrict
the deredshifted wavelength range from 4200 Å to 9200
Å and interpolate the fluxes with a cubic spline function to get fluxes at a fixed space wavelength array of
256 points (to match the sampling across SEDM and
Open SN catalog spectra) in the mentioned wavelength
range. This flux array is then median filtered, and normalized, and any ‘nan’ values are converted to zero. We
do not divide the spectra by the continuum as the continuum also contains information relevant to supernova
classification.
2.1.2. 1D light curves
We take the 5σ detections from the ZTF g- and r-band
light curves and fit them using Gaussian process (GP)
regression with brightness as the dependent variable (in

6

Sharma et al.

Figure 2. Training data samples representing the various transient types (rows). The first column shows the raw (red) and
processed (black) normalized spectra, the second column shows the raw and GP-interpolated r- and g-band normalized light
curves, and the third and fourth columns show δm − δt representations of the r- and g-band GP-interpolated light curves,
respectively.

7
magnitudes) and phase from first detection as the independent variable (in days). Interpolation is necessary
as the cadence of the light curves is not constant and
there are gaps in the data due to weather, sun occultation, and instrument downtime. We use a combination
of a radial basis function (RBF, also known as “squaredexponential”) kernel with length scale bounds between
(20,200) days, and a White Kernel to characterize the
noise. We interpolate magnitudes and magnitude errors
between the first and last detection in 1 day bins. Since
all the input samples to the model need to be of fixed
length, we pad the interpolated light curves with zeros
if they are shorter than 200 days, and truncate if they
are longer. These fixed length magnitudes and magnitude error arrays are then converted to linear fluxes
(erg s−1 cm−2 Å−1 ) and normalized. The light curves
are not redshifted or K-corrected to limit preprocessing
steps, especially the ones that rely on prior redshift being available. The final input that goes to the model is a
stacked array with fluxes at the 0th index and flux errors
at the 1st index, with a shape of (200,2) per sample.
2.1.3. δm − δt light curves
From the interpolated light curves, we compute the
magnitude and time (in days) difference for all pairs of
light curve points and create a 2D histogram with fixed
but non-uniform bin sizes in magnitude and phase space.
The bin intervals are decided based on the magnitude
ranges that our transients span and their typical duration timescales. The magnitude bin edges are [−4.5, −3,
−2.5, −2, −1.5, −1.25, −0.75, −0.5, −0.3, −0.2, −0.1,
−0.05, 0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5, 0.75, 1.25, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3,
1
4
4.5] mags, and the phase bin edges are [0, 24
, 24
, 0.25,
0.5, 0.75, 1, 2, 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 24, 33, 48, 63, 72, 96,
126, 153, 180, 216, 255, 300] days. The shape of these
2D histogram inputs is (24,24) per sample. Examples
of δm − δt histograms for the SN subtypes are shown in
Figure 2.
2.1.4. Simulated data for augmentation
The number of synthetic samples to create per subtype is specified during the preprocessing step. For a
given subtype, we create two subsets from its training
samples depending on the phase of the spectrum, the
first subset (early-time phase) contains spectra taken
before the light curve maximum, and the second subset
(photospheric phase) has spectra taken after the light
curve maximum till the SN becomes nebular. We use
the early-time subset to create 30% of the total synthetic samples and the photospheric subset for the remaining 70%. To make a synthetic sample, we randomly
choose pairs of samples from a subset without replacements and take the weighted average of their rest-frame

(deredshifted) spectra with randomly chosen weights to
generate the synthetic spectrum. We also set the synthetic sample’s redshift to the weighted average of the
pair’s redshifts. Then, we pick one of the light curves
from the pair, scale its flux to the new luminosity distance (redshift), and use it to generate the synthetic 1D
interpolated light curves and their δm − δt representations for the synthetic sample.
3. PARALLEL BINARY CLASSIFIERS

We used Keras (Chollet et al. 2015) Python library
on top of TensorFlow (Abadi et al. 2015) framework
for this study. We initially started with a single multiclass model to classify all CCSN subtypes similar to
what is done in DASH (Muthukrishna et al. 2019). During early training and validation, although the overall
model accuracy was poor (∼50 %), we recognized that
the H-rich subtypes (Type II) formed a group, better
separated from the H-poor subtypes (Type Ibc) group.
Thus we decided to make an application divided into
two hierarchical layers based on the current core-collapse
SN classification scheme and use parallel binary classifiers (also known as the One vs. Rest strategy) in each
layer instead of a single multiclass model. Our application’s layer 1 has two binary classifiers, one trained for
hydrogen-rich (H-rich) SNe and the second for hydrogenpoor (H-poor) SNe. Though this could have been a single binary classifier task, we train two parallel classifiers
for an added layer of robustness. Layer 2a has three binary classifiers for three major subtypes of H-rich SNe
(II – normal Type II spectra, IIb-H – IIb spectra with
hydrogen present, IIn – narrow lines from interaction)
and layer 2b also has three models for major subtypes
of H-poor SNe (Ib, Ic, Ic-BL). In total, we have 8 binary
classification tasks.
The number of samples in the training and test sets
for each layer is outlined in Table 1. The number inside
brackets in the ‘training samples’ column in Table 1 is
the real number of training samples of that class, and the
number outside brackets is the total training samples including the augmented data. The number of augmented
samples added to each class is such that the total number of samples is roughly balanced across all classes in
that layer, making the training samples of the sub-layers
2a and 2b not add up to the respective layer 1 numbers.
The gold vs. bronze test set evaluation is only done for
layer 1.
The architecture of a single binary classifier model
that we arrived at after the optimization process described in Section 4 is shown in Figure 3. The models
can be trained with up to five input channels, one for
1D optical spectra (the only required channel), two for

8

Sharma et al.

Figure 3. Multi-channel network architecture of CCSNscore. We found two bidirectional LSTM layers optimal for the spectrum
channel, and three LSTM layers optimal for the light curve channels.

1D ZTF light curves (LC; r and g bands), and two for
the δm − δt representations of the 1D light curves. The
multiple inputs are processed through separate network
paths concatenated at the end, and the output is passed
through a final dense layer with a sigmoid activation
function to generate the final output probabilities. We
experimented with several configurations by varying the
kind of neural network layers in the channels and the
number of layers per channel to arrive at the base architecture and then optimized its hyperparameters.
4. OPTIMIZATION AND TRAINING

For the first step of the optimization process, we kept
the number of NN layers constant (two per channel)
and trained several models varying just the NN layer
type. For spectra and 1D light curves, we decided to
test 1D convolutional neural networks (CNN) and recurrent neural networks (RNN), specifically Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU), Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
and bi-directional LSTM among the RNN layer types.

For δm − δt we decided to use 2D CNN layers. We
used a 10% dropout rate3 in between NN layers to
tackle overfitting of the data. These initial models were
compiled with the Adam optimizer (initial learning rate,
lr = 0.001) and BinaryCrossentropy loss. The models
were trained on H-rich and H-poor classification tasks
with a batch size4 of 32, a validation split5 of 33%, and
an early stopping criteria6 (patience value of 7 on validation loss). Validation accuracy and precision were used
to decide the best model. We found that bi-LSTM layers performed best for the spectral channel and LSTM
layers performed best for the 1D light curve channel, as
3 Percentage of nodes intentionally dropped from the neural net-

work to prevent overfitting
4 The number of samples used in one training pass of the network
5 Percentage of training data to be used for validation
6 A conditional criteria to stop the training of a model early if the

loss does not decrease for a certain number (patience value) of
epochs.

9
Table 1. Total number of samples in the training and test
sets per binary classifier. The total number of training samples (including augmented data) per class is listed outside
brackets in the second column, while the real number of
training samples is listed inside brackets. The number of
samples in the gold test set is listed outside brackets in the
third column while the number of samples in the bronze set
is listed inside brackets for Layer 1. The amount of augmented data added to each classifier in a layer is such that
the samples per class are roughly balanced.

Classifier

# Training samples
Total (real)

# Test samples
Gold (bronze)

Layer 1
H-rich
H-poor

8478 (6025)
8869 (2538)

627 (536)
153 (219)

Layer 2a
II
IIb-H
IIn

6027 (4713)
5500 (471)
5999 (841)

911
80
172

Layer 2b
Ib
Ic
Ic-BL

1761 (760)
1775 (774)
1844 (343)

110
142
103

they captured the connections present within these serial data. We then optimized the number of NN layers in
each channel by varying them in one channel at a time
between 1 to 4 NN layers, keeping the other channels
and dropouts unchanged. The models were compiled,
trained, and evaluated in the same manner as before and
the optimal number of NN layers found per channel are
shown in Figure 3. Next, with the help of kerastuner,
we trained a grid of models varying the hyperparameter
values within the ranges listed in Table 2 to find the bestperforming values. This tuning was done separately for
H-rich and H-poor binary classifiers (all input channels
used) and both classifiers settled to the same optimal
hyperparameters. We applied further manual tuning to
arrive at the final hyperparameter values shown in Figure 3. Our best-performing model favors high dropout
rates similar to SNIascore. We found that the initial
learning rate of the Adam optimizer, lr = 0.001, and a
mini-batch size of 64 performed well across all the binary
classifiers.
For the final training of the binary classifiers, we use
a validation split of 0.33, 100 epochs, and apply early
stopping criteria with a patience value of 7 on the vali-

Table 2. Hyperparameter ranges for tuning binary classifiers with kerastuner.

Layers

Range
(units)

Step
(units)

biLSTM
LSTM
Conv 2D (1)
Conv 2D (2)
Dense
Dropout

4 – 24
4 – 24
16 – 64
8 – 32
8 – 64
0.1 – 0.9

4
4
16
8
8
0.2

dation loss metric. For balanced training of the binary
classifiers in case one class has more samples than the
other, we take all samples of the smaller class and choose
an equal number of samples from the larger class for
the first round of training. Then, we repeat the training by redrawing samples from the larger class without
substitution until enough samples are left in the larger
class or the training has been repeated 3 times. After
all the binary classifiers have been trained and saved,
we predict the final classifications on the test sets. We
generate 100 predictions per sample with dropout enabled in the trained model (Monte Carlo Dropout technique) and calculate the mean and standard deviation
of the 100 predicted probabilities to get the final predicted probability and the uncertainty on it. This is
done for each sample to get predictions from each binary classifier. We use the following scheme to get the
final classifications based on the probabilities given by
the parallel classifiers. The classifier that provides the
maximum probability is chosen as the final class (and
the max probability as the final score) if the difference
between the highest and the second highest probabilities is more than the sum of their uncertainties. The
remaining samples are assigned an ‘ambiguous’ classification and a score of zero.
We also train sets of models for different input channel
combinations (input cases) for each binary classification
task to compare the contribution of the light curve input
in different forms. The input cases are as follows: ‘only
spectra’, ‘spectra + 1D LC’, ‘spectra + δm − δt’, and
‘spectra + 1D LC + δm − δt’ (all channels). The results
of this comparison are presented in §5.
5. PERFORMANCE

5.1. Layer 1: H-rich vs. H-poor
Figures 4 and 5 show the performance of the layer 1
classification task i.e. H-rich vs. H-poor. Figure 4a
shows results for the “only spectra” input case models

10

Sharma et al.

(a) Results from binary classifiers trained only using the spectral input channel.

(b) Results from binary classifiers trained using all input channels, i.e. spectra, light curves, and δm − δt.

Figure 4. Performance of layer 1 binary classifiers on gold and bronze test sets. Left Distribution of binary classifier predicted
probabilities for positive class (blue) vs. negative class (red) for H-rich and H-poor classifiers. The gold test set distribution is
depicted as filled bars and the bronze set distribution as empty steps. Right ROC curve from the two layer 1 binary classifiers
(blue and red), with SNID (purple) and DASH (teal) for comparison. The gold set curves are depicted with solid lines and the
bronze set curves with dotted lines. The black vertical dashed line marks a 2% false positive rate.

11
and Figure 4b for the “all channels” input case models.
The left panel in both subfigures shows the distribution
of probabilities predicted for the gold (filled bars) and
bronze (not filled bars) test sets, with blue bars denoting samples that belong to the class (positive) and red
bars for samples that do not (negative). For any good
binary classifier, this distribution should be highly bimodal with the positive class getting the highest probability scores and the negative class getting the lowest.
Models of both input cases show such bimodal distributions, but the distribution is less sharp for the “only
spectra” input case than for the “all channels” case.
Thus, adding the light curve inputs to model training
results in general higher predicted probabilities for the
positive class and lower predicted probabilities for the
negative class. However, it also increases the predicted
probabilities of the false positive cases.
The right panel in both subfigures of Figure 4 shows
the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve for
the two layer 1 classifiers (in blue and red lines) on the
gold and bronze test sets, along with the SNID (purple lines) and DASH (teal lines) ROC curves for comparison. A ROC curve depicts the true positive rate
(TPR) vs. false positive rate (FPR) at all classification
thresholds, which for our binary classifiers and DASH
are the predicted probabilities while for SNID are the
rlap scores (see Appendix A for the method used to construct SNID ROC curves). The SNID and DASH ROC
curves are calculated considering H-rich as the positive
class. Our best classifiers achieve ≥ 90% TPR compared to SNID’s ∼ 75% TPR at a FPR of 10% and
DASH’s ∼ 65% TPR at a FPR of ∼ 6% on the gold set.
Similar behavior is observed for the bronze set, with our
best classifier achieving 30–60% TPR versus SNID’s and
DASH’s ∼ 10% TPR at a FPR of 10%.
The addition of light curve inputs (both 1D LC and
δm − δt together) ends up reducing the performance of
both classifiers on the gold set but improves the performance on the bronze set, especially for the H-rich
case with its area-under-the-curve (AUC) being larger
for the model trained on all channels (see solid and
dashed lines in right panels of Figures 4b and 4a respectively). This indicates that perhaps additional input is
more suitable when the spectrum is of lesser quality, but
can lead to more inaccuracies and model confusion otherwise. This could be due to how the multi-input channels are concatenated in CCSNscore architecture (see
Figure 3), with the spectral channel getting less weight
as more channels are added.
For directly sending classifications to TNS without human intervention, a model with extremely low FPR is
preferred, similar to SNIascore (Fremling et al. 2021).

If 2% FPR can be risked, ∼ 80 − 90% of both H-rich
and H-poor gold quality SNe can be sent to TNS using
the best-performing models. For SNID this fraction is
only ∼ 10%. However, programs like SNID, as well as
Superfit (Howell et al. 2005) and Gelato (Harutyunyan
et al. 2008)), were always meant to assist with the classification process and thus perform best with manual user
inputs, often providing more information than just the
classification (for example, age, fairly accurate redshift,
similarity to historical SNe, host galaxy characteristics,
etc.). A more appropriate comparison can be made with
DASH (Muthukrishna et al. 2019), which also employs
deep learning for automated classification purposes. In
Muthukrishna et al. (2019), DASH’s performance was
tested on 212 spectra from OzDES ATELs released between 2015 and 2017 out of which 81% were SNe Ia,
and DASH provided correct classifications for 93% of
the 212 SNe. However, the same performance of DASH
could not be attained on the SEDM spectra as tested in
Fremling et al. (2021). Kim et al. (2024) compared the
performance of SNID, NGSF (Goldwasser et al. 2022),
and DASH on ∼ 4600 SEDM spectra and found the
automatic accuracy for five-class classification task (Ia,
II, Ibc, SLSN, notSN) to be ∼ 63% (SNID), ∼ 75%
(NGSF) and ∼ 62% (DASH). Particularly for CCSNe,
DASH achieved only ∼ 29% TPR at ∼ 3% FPR for Type
II and ∼ 79% TPR at ∼ 32% FPR for Type Ibc, which
is not suitable for reporting classifications to TNS. We
see the same with DASH’s performance on our test sets,
which is ∼ 35% TPR for the gold set and ∼ 4% TPR
for the bronze set at a 2% FPR.
Figure 5 displays the confusion matrices (CMs) for the
gold and bronze test sets derived from the predictions of
our layer 1 models (the four input cases). We present the
CM data in ‘number of samples’ instead of percentages
to emphasize the number of misclassifications. The top
row of CMs in both sub-figures (5a & 5b) are for the
gold set and the bottom row of CMs are for the bronze
set. The four columns of matrices are for the four input
cases (from left to right, ‘only spectra’, ‘spectra + 1D
LC’, ‘spectra + δm − δt’, and ‘spectra + 1D LC + δm −
δt’). The ‘accuracy’ metric is printed under each CM.
Henceforth, ‘only spectra’, ‘spectra + 1D LC’, ‘spectra
+ δm − δt’, and ‘spectra + 1D LC + δm − δt’ input
cases will be referred to as cases ‘S’, ‘SL’, ‘SD’, and
‘SLD’ respectively.
Figure 5a shows the CMs constructed by including all
samples of test sets without applying any quality cut on
the predicted probabilities. As mentioned earlier in §4,
the classifier that assigns the highest probability is chosen as the class for a test sample if the difference between
the highest and the second highest probability is more

12

Sharma et al.

(a) CMs constructed using all of the test samples’ classifications. The ‘Ambi’ column contains samples for which H-rich

and H-poor classifiers assigned probabilities within their uncertainties. The overall classification accuracy for the gold set
is highest in the ‘only spectra’ case (without light curve addition), while for the bronze set is highest in the ‘spectra +
1D LCs’ case. The utility of light curve input is reflected better in Figure 5b when probability cuts are applied.

(b) CMs derived using only the test samples that pass confidence and uncertainty cuts. All the ambiguous cases get filtered

out with a strict probability cut. The fraction of the test set that qualifies these cuts is printed under each confusion
matrix. More bronze quality data gets reliable predictions when light curve inputs are used.
Figure 5. Results from the layer 1 (H-rich vs. H-poor) models. The four columns of confusion matrices (CM) are for the four
input cases — ‘only spectra’, ‘spectra + 1D LC’, ‘spectra + δm − δt’, and ‘spectra + 1D LC + δm − δt’. The top row of CMs
in each subfigure is for the gold test set and the bottom row of CMs is for the bronze test set.

13
than the sum of their uncertainties, otherwise, the test
sample gets an ‘ambiguous’ tag. These ambiguous cases
occupy the third column in the CMs of Figure 5a. When
spectral quality is good (gold set), the case S model performs better than other input cases, has the lowest number of false and ambiguous predictions, and the highest
accuracy of 93.5% (see Figure 5a). When spectral quality is poor (bronze set), all cases perform similarly with
case SL having slightly higher accuracy. The true usefulness of the light curve input can be seen in Figure 5b,
which shows the CMs constructed from the subset of
the test sets filtered by cuts on predicted probability
(P ) and their uncertainties (Punc ) determined heuristically to obtain the most confident classifications. The
threshold cuts are P > 0.8, Punc < 0.05 for the gold set,
and P > 0.9, Punc < 0.05 for the bronze set (slightly
stricter). The filtered subset fraction is printed under
each matrix in Figure 5b. A high probability threshold
reduces false positives and increases accuracy, but discards the test samples that do not pass the threshold
cuts. From Figure 5b, we note that a higher fraction of
bronze test samples pass the cuts in cases SL, SD, and
SLD while maintaining high accuracies. For gold test
samples, this holds for case SL which has 82.8% confident classifications compared to 79.4% in case S. This
increase in high-confidence classifications also slightly
increases false positives and negatives, which for the gold
set reduces the accuracy in case SL to 98% from 98.7%
in case S. But for the bronze set the overall accuracy
in case SLD still increases. Thus, multi-input channel
models that can ingest auxiliary information relevant to
classification are better suited for lesser-quality spectral
data.
A caveat with our models is that they were trained on
spectra that had been deredshifted (transformed from
observed wavelengths to rest-frame wavelengths), and
thus would require redshift information for real-time application. To analyze the effect of redshifting, we trained
binary classifiers for H-rich and H-poor classes using
only the spectral channel and redshifted spectra. We
found that the classification accuracy for the whole set
(gold + bronze) is ∼ 85.9%, the same as the performance of models trained on deredshifted spectra. This
is expected as bi-directional LSTM layers are capable of
capturing dependencies in sequences in both directions
simultaneously.
Another caveat with our models is that they were
trained using the full duration of light curves but for
real-time application, only epochs up until the spectral
phase will be available (mostly early-time or pre-peak
phase). Thus the real-time performance of the models using light curve input will be different than pre-

sented. Hence, we plan on using the Case S models for
real-time TNS reporting until the performance of partial
light curve input is characterized.
Table 3 further lists the following metrics that quantify the performance of our layer 1 models:
TP + TN
TP + FN + FP + TN
TP
Precision (or Purity) =
TP + FP
TP
TPR (or Recall) =
TP + FN
FP
FPR =
FP + TN
2 × Precision × Recall
F1score =
Precision + Recall
Accuracy =

(1)

where T P stands for true positives, F P for false positives, F N for false negatives and T N for true negatives.
Ambiguous cases were counted as F N for the TPR calculation and T N for the FPR calculation.
5.1.1. Layer 1 misclassifications
From Figure 5b, there are 3, 2, 10, and 6 samples of
the H-poor class from the gold set that get misclassified
as H-rich even with confidence cuts in cases S, SL, SD,
and SLD respectively. There are 14 unique misclassified
samples out of these 21, with some common samples
among cases, and the misclassifications share some similarities. The misclassifications in cases S and SL have
weak H-poor spectral line features with a strong blue
continuum, making them look similar to early-time Hrich spectra. Out of the 10 misclassifications in case SD,
2 are the same as case S, and the remaining 8 have either long declining or peculiar light curves (unlike regular Type Ibc SNe) possibly influencing the incorrect
decision. Finally, of the 6 case SLD misclassifications,
3 are common with case SD, and the remaining 3 are
cases that completely lack g-band coverage.
Similarly, 5, 11, 15, and 8 gold samples of the H-rich
class are misclassified as H-poor in cases S, SL, SD, and
SLD respectively. Out of the 5 case S misclassifications,
3 are nebular spectra, 1 does not show Hα emission and
1 seems to be a genuine mistake. Out of the 11 case SL
misclassifications, 7 are nebular spectra from the same
supernova, SN 2023rky – a Type IIL (that have a similar light curve shape to H-poor SNe), 1 does not show
strong Hα emission, and the remaining 3 are genuine
mistakes. Nine of 15 Case SD misclassifications are also
from SN 2023rky, 2 do not show Hα emission and 4
are genuine mistakes. For case SLD, 6 out of 8 misclassifications are from SN 2023rky and the remaining 2
are genuine mistakes. There are 20 unique misclassified

14

Sharma et al.

Table 3. Performance metrics of the layer 1 task models on the gold and bronze test sets. The total accuracy in the final row
shows the combined performance on the gold and bronze sets.

Only Spectra
Case S
H-rich

H-poor

Spectra + 1D LCs
Case SL

Spectra + δm − δt
Case SD

H-rich

H-rich

H-poor

H-poor

All channels
Case SLD
H-rich

H-poor

Gold

F1 score
Precision
TPR
FPR
Accuracy

96.5%
90.3%
99.0%
89.7%
94.1%
90.8%
3.9%
2.6%
93.5%

95.7%
88.5%
99.3%
86.8%
92.3%
90.2%
2.6%
3.3%
91.9%

91.9%
78.4%
96.7%
81.1%
87.6%
75.8%
12.4%
4.3%
85.3%

93.6%
80.3%
96.8%
83.7%
90.6%
77.1%
12.4%
3.7%
87.9%

Bronze

F1 score
Precision
TPR
FPR
Accuracy

86.1%
69.7%
87.2%
85.4%
85.1%
58.9%
30.6%
4.1%
77.5%

87.7%
70.1%
88.7%
84.5%
86.8%
59.8%
26.9%
4.5%
78.9%

85.4%
63.6%
88.2%
87.9%
82.6%
49.8%
26.9%
2.8%
73.1%

86.9%
70.8%
89.7%
90.7%
84.3%
58.0%
23.7%
2.4%
76.7%

Total

Accuracy

85.6%

85.5%

79.3%

82.4%

samples across all cases (39 total) from 12 unique SNe,
and 9 samples belong to just one SN.
Considering the bronze set, there are many H-poor
SNe misclassified as H-rich (Figure 5a), most of which
are because of host contamination. For example, 56 out
of the 67 bronze set misclassifications in case S are due
to host contamination. The host-contamination cases
are inherently difficult to classify with SEDM spectra
even with the help of SNID or NGSF, and thus often
require intervention at the level of raw data reduction.
Another observation can be made from Figure 5a for the
ambiguous cases. The bronze set has more ambiguous
classifications for all the input cases, with more H-rich
SNe classified as ambiguous (likely due to a higher occurrence of blue featureless spectra).
5.2. Layer 2: Sub-typing of H-rich and H-poor SNe
The performance of CCSNscore’s layer 2a and layer 2b
models which are trained for classification into subtypes
of Type II and Type Ibc respectively are presented in
Figure 6. The confusion matrices are created with the
full set instead of splitting into gold and bronze sets as
the rarer subsets already have limited samples. Looking at the effect of light curve input on classification
accuracy, layer 2a (SN II subtypes; Figure 6a) seems
to benefit marginally from the light curve input (particularly δm − δt). While cases SL, SD, and SLD have
fewer Type IIb-H and Type IIn samples misclassified as
normal Type II, they also have more normal Type II
misclassified as the ‘IIn’ or ambiguous.
The opposite effect of light curve addition is seen for
layer 2b (SN Ibc subtypes; Figure 6b). Cases SL, SD,

and SLD have lower accuracies than in case S, with
case SD performing the worst. As SESN light curve
properties do not differ much among the subtypes, perhaps the extra input information lends to confusion in
the models. On the other hand, SN II light curve properties of normal Type II, IIb, and IIn at least show some
variety, thus making the extra input marginally useful.
From Figure 6b, the case S accuracy is the highest at
41.7%, but many misclassifications are among Ic and IcBL samples. If Ic and Ic-BL samples are considered just
one class (Ic) and accuracy is measured for a Type Ib
vs. Type Ic classification, case S accuracy gets bumped
up to 58.7% including ambiguous samples. If ambiguous
samples are not considered, 72% of the total samples get
a non-ambiguous (Ib or Ic) classification out of which
81.7% are correct. Though this might not be robust
enough for fully automated classification, the subtype
predictions from CCSNscore can be provided as additional information with the TNS reports.
6. REAL-TIME IMPLEMENTATION

CCSNscore will be integrated into the current SEDM
pipeline which already runs SNID and SNIascore. It will
be used in conjunction with SNIascore to infer the classification for real-time application. The following scenarios are possible based on figure 4 of Fremling et al.
(2021). First, ∼ 85% of true SNe Ia and ∼ 0.5% of
true CCSNe are likely to pass SN Iascore > 0.6 cut,
which has generally been robust enough for automated
SN Ia classification reporting. Since CCSNscore has not
been trained on SN Ia data, its performance on real
SNe Ia is unreliable, and thus using CCSNscore pre-

15

(a) Confusion matrices from the layer 2a (II, IIb-H, IIn) models.

(b) Confusion matrices from the layer 2b (Ib, Ic, Ic-BL) models.

Figure 6. Confusion matrices for the whole test set derived from the layer 2 models. The four columns in subfigures are for the
four input cases — ‘only spectra’, ‘spectra + 1D LC’, ‘spectra + δm − δt’, and ‘spectra + 1D LC + δm − δt’. These confusion
matrices were constructed considering all of the test samples’ classifications.

diction in this scenario will not help recover the 0.5%
true CCSNe. Therefore, CCSNscore predictions will not
be considered where SN Iascore > 0.6. Next, ∼ 12%
true SNe Ia and ∼ 9.5% true CCSNe are likely to get
0.1 < SN Iascore < 0.6. In this scenario, a H-rich classification by CCSNscore can mean host-contamination
in the spectrum (which should not be sent to TNS), a
bad classification, or a true SN II. A H-poor classification by CCSNscore does not provide any distinguishing information as SNe Ia are also hydrogen-poor. We
will flag these cases for visual inspection and not report
them automatically. In total, ∼ 10% of true CCSNe
will not meet automatic classification criteria during
real-time operations. Finally, ∼ 90% true CCSNe and
∼ 3% true SNe Ia will likely pass the SN Iascore < 0.1
cut. The 3% SN Ia false negatives will comprise difficult cases of host contamination, peculiar SNe Ia, or
bad classifications. From preliminary analysis, we found
that with the strict threshold cuts on CCSN score and
numSN ID that we apply for TNS reporting (described
below), most of these SN Ia false negatives get filtered
out and the number of true SNe Ia misclassified as CC-

SNe that might get sent to TNS goes down to ∼ 0.5%.
From the BTS survey, ∼ 800 SNe with mpk ≤ 18.5 are
expected to be classified as SNe Ia annually, which translates to ∼ 24 SNe Ia getting a SN Iascore < 0.1 and only
∼ 4 SNe Ia per year passing the further TNS reporting
criteria, which is a small number objectively. Therefore, we will use this criteria (SN Iascore < 0.1) to filter out potential CCSNe from SNe Ia and CCSN score,
and numSN ID quality criteria will be used to determine their automatic reporting eligibility. Note that
these numbers may change over time based on the realtime performance of the classifiers, so we will adjust the
thresholds later on if needed7 .
As the performance of models that include light curve
input on only early-time light curve data has not been
characterized, we will use the layer 1 ‘only spectra’
model predictions for TNS reporting for now while
we further analyze the light curve input performance.
7 The current TNS reporting criteria cuts are posted on the CC-

SNscore GitHub page and will be updated there if any changes
are made.

16

Sharma et al.

Therefore, the CCSN score and CCSN scoreunc are
the prediction probability and uncertainty on prediction
probability, respectively, obtained from the ‘only spectra’ model for H-rich (Type II) vs. H-poor (Type Ibc)
task. The TNS reporting criteria will be as follows:
1. For numSN ID ≥ 30: CCSN score > 0.8 and
CCSN scoreunc < 0.05
2. For 20 ≤ numSN ID < 30: CCSN score > 0.9
and CCSN Scoreunc < 0.05
3. For numSN ID < 20: CCSN score > 0.95 and
CCSN scoreunc < 0.05
The number of samples that pass the above three criteria in our full test set (1535 samples) are 634, 49, and
275, respectively (62.4% of the full test set). Out of
these, 598, 48, and 255 are correct classifications, which
corresponds to a ∼ 94% accuracy rate and 6% misclassifications. Among the SESNe in the full test set, 174,
13 and 59 pass the three TNS reporting criteria respectively, which corresponds to ∼ 66% of the total SESNe
(372). Again from the BTS survey, ∼ 81 SNe with
mpk ≤ 18.5 are expected to be classified as SESNe annually, and therefore ∼ 66% of them or ∼ 53 will pass the
TNS reporting criteria. Therefore, the ∼ 4 SNe Ia that
are expected to be falsely reported to TNS as SESNe annually will make up ∼ 7.5% of the total reported SESNe
classifications. Improving the SN Ia automatic classifiers
can help reduce these false positives in the future.
A breakdown of the true positive rate by phase and
true type is shown in Table 4 for the samples that pass
the TNS criteria. We do not see a significant difference with phase for Type II samples under any criteria. However, Type Ibc samples under numSN ID ≥ 30
have a higher true positive rate and precision for earlier
phases (phase≤ 10 days), while for numSN ID < 20,
the true positive rate and precision are higher for the
later phases. This indicates that the difficult cases have
a better chance of successful classification with postpeak spectra. We plan on further testing and revising
this selection scheme over the next few months before
actually starting real-time TNS reporting.

Table 4. Performance of the layer 1 ‘only spectra’ model
predictions on the test samples that pass the TNS reporting
criteria. The true positive rate and precision values are reported separately by phase (≤ 10 days or > 10 days) and
the true type (II and Ibc). The number of samples that pass
the different TNS criteria is shown in brackets in the first
column.

True class:
Phase:

Type II

Type Ibc

≤ 10d

> 10d

≤ 10d

> 10d

1.
(634)

TPR
Precision

99.7%
94.0%

97.5%
92.8%

83.2%
98.9%

80.3%
92.4%

2.
(49)

TPR
Precision

100%
96.4%

100%
100%

87.5%
100%

100%
100%

3.
(275)

TPR
Precision

96.4%
95.3%

95.7%
91.8%

78.4%
82.8%

81.8%
90.0%

layer 2b meant for classification between subtypes of
Type Ibc (Ib, Ic, Ic-BL). CCSNscore can be trained
with up to five input channels, the spectral channel for
SEDM spectra being the required input, and the ZTF gand r-band 1D light curves and their respective δm − δt
representations as four additional inputs. We trained
four different models for four input cases (‘only spectra’,
‘spectra + 1D LC’, ‘spectra + δm − δt’, and ‘spectra +
1D LC + δm − δt’) and quantified the benefit of light
curves to the classification process. We list our main
results below:

7. DISCUSSION AND SUMMARY

• CCSNscore’s layer 1 performance with just spectral data input is quite robust for real-time TNS
reporting of the classifications when strict score
and uncertainty cuts are applied. Adding light
curve input boosts the number of samples with
high scores while maintaining accuracy, which can
be useful for difficult classification cases. With just
spectra, only 79.4% (54.2%) of the gold (bronze)
test set pass the threshold cuts, out of which 98.7%
(87%) are accurate. Comparatively, with spectra
and 1D light curves, 82.8% (57.4%) of the gold
(bronze) test set pass the threshold cuts, out of
which 98% (93.5%) are accurate.

In this work, we have presented a new deep-learning
based software for the automated classification of corecollapse supernovae from their ultra-low resolution spectra (from SEDM) called CCSNscore. CCSNscore consists of hierarchical classification tasks, with its layer 1
meant for classification between Type II (or H-rich) and
Type Ibc (or H-poor) SNe, layer 2a meant for classification between subtypes of Type II (II, IIb, IIn), and

• CCSNscore also provides subtype predictions from
its layer 2 models, which can assist astronomers
with manual classifications. The light curve input
marginally improves accuracy over the ‘only spectra’ case in the Type II subtyping task. On the
other hand, given that SN Ib and Ic light curves
are very similar, the light curve input actually re-

17
duces the classification accuracy for the Type Ibc
subtyping task.
• RNN architecture seems optimal for ultra-low resolution spectral sequences, as found in this study
and in Fremling et al. (2021). The biLSTM layers
are also capable of deducing classification without
needing redshift correction.
• CCSNscore misclassifies H-poor SNe as H-rich
more frequently than it does the other way around
because of host-contamination cases, thus making H-poor predictions more reliable until hostcontamination is dealt with at the data processing level. The misclassified true H-rich samples
come from multiple spectra of a few unique SNe.
The misclassified true H-poor samples come less
often from multiple spectra of a few unique SNe
but often share similar characteristics (weak features, strong host lines, etc.).
• We will use SNIascore to filter out likely SNe Ia
and select potential CCSNe candidates by applying a threshold cut of SN Iascore < 0.1.
Then, we will apply threshold cuts on numSN ID,
CCSN score, and CCSN scoreunc to determine eligible candidates for reporting to TNS as described
in §??. Based on the BTS statistics on bright transients (mpk ≤ 18.5) and expected SNIascore and
CCSNscore performance, we expect ∼ 0.5% (∼ 4)
of true SNe Ia to be misclassified as SNe Ibc on
TNS annually. For the classification of CCSNe
into Type II or Type Ibc, we expect ∼ 62% of
the total real-time true CCSNe spectra to qualify
for TNS reporting, out of which we expect ∼ 94%
correct classifications and ∼ 6% misclassifications.
Kim et al. (2024) suggest that the effect of instrument
resolution might not be significant for SEDM spectra
when it comes to classification by SNID, NGSF, and
DASH as all three programs appropriately preprocess
the input (including smoothing and binning) to compare to the templates. But still, DASH’s performance
on SEDM spectra does not compare to models trained
specifically using SEDM spectra like SNIascore and CCSNscore. This arises from the fact that deep learning
models can be sensitive to the data they are trained
with and do not generalize well until trained with an
extremely large quantity of data. Kim et al. (2024) also
note that a two-category classification task has more
accurate results than a five-category task as CCSNe are
more difficult to classify than SNe Ia, and CCSNe need
more than just spectral information to be classified robustly. CCSNscore addresses the above issues by

1. increasing the training data by including spectra
from the Open Supernova Catalog smoothed to
match the varying resolutions to the SEDM training set,
2. splitting the classification tasks into hierarchical
layers which are based on the traditional supernova classification scheme and training parallel binary classifiers instead of a single multi-class classifier,
3. using a model architecture that can ingest multiple
types of inputs, and using photometry data as an
additional input.
The dominant source of CCSNscore’s misclassifications is host contamination, which is difficult to eliminate from the final processed spectra. SEDM’s resolution augments the issue by blending the strong host lines
around Hα, making them appear like SN II or SN IIn Hα
features. There are efforts to separate the SN light from
its host galaxy at the data reduction level for SEDM
through careful contour separation (Kim et al. 2022) and
hyperspectral scene modeling of the host galaxy (Lezmy
et al. 2022), which could greatly improve CCSNscore’s
automatic typing accuracy.
Another possible method to improve the fidelity of
CCSNscore could be changing the way photometric input is supplied and modeled. A well-performing photometric supernova classifier architecture from the literature that has already been tested independently
(Charnock & Moss 2017; Pasquet et al. 2019; Möller
& de Boissière 2020; Burhanudin & Maund 2022; Allam
& McEwen 2023) could be added as an additional input
channel. Moreover, models that can predict the classification using only early-time photometric data and hostgalaxy information will be the most useful as additional
channels to CCSNscore (Muthukrishna et al. 2019; Qu
& Sako 2022).
CCSNscore is a small step towards handling the increased load of transient spectroscopic data, which will
become more important for future photometric and
spectroscopic surveys. Currently, CCSNscore is only capable of providing a robust broad Type (II vs. Ibc) and
a prediction for a subtype (less accurately) but does not
provide other crucial information that can be deduced
from spectra (redshift and phase). Future work for CCSNscore could focus on attempting redshift prediction
using a similar model structure and exploring auxiliary
inputs that can aid in such a task.
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Based on observations obtained with the Samuel
Oschin Telescope 48-inch and the 60-inch Telescope at

18

Sharma et al.

the Palomar Observatory as part of the Zwicky Transient Facility project. ZTF is supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grants No. AST-1440341
and AST-2034437 and a collaboration including current partners Caltech, IPAC, the Weizmann Institute of
Science, the Oskar Klein Center at Stockholm University, the University of Maryland, Deutsches ElektronenSynchrotron and Humboldt University, the TANGO
Consortium of Taiwan, the University of Wisconsin
at Milwaukee, Trinity College Dublin, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratories, IN2P3, University of Warwick, Ruhr University Bochum, Northwestern University and former partners the University of Washington,
Los Alamos National Laboratories, and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratories. Operations are conducted
by COO, IPAC, and UW. The ZTF forced-photometry
service was funded under the Heising-Simons Foundation grant #12540303 (PI: Graham). The SED Machine is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant No. 1106171. This
work was supported by the GROWTH project (Kasliwal
et al. 2019) funded by the National Science Foundation

under Grant No 1545949. MMK acknowledges generous
support from the David and Lucille Packard Foundation.
The Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, through both
the Data-Driven Investigator Program and a dedicated
grant, provided critical funding for SkyPortal.
Y. Sharma thanks the LSSTC Data Science Fellowship
Program, which is funded by LSSTC, NSF Cybertraining Grant #1829740, the Brinson Foundation, and the
Moore Foundation; her participation in the program has
benefited this work. M.W.C acknowledges support from
the National Science Foundation with grant numbers
PHY-2308862 and PHY-2117997. Zwicky Transient Facility access for N.R. was supported by Northwestern
University and the Center for Interdisciplinary Exploration and Research in Astrophysics (CIERA). Y.-L.K.
has received funding from the Science and Technology
Facilities Council [grant number ST/V000713/1].

Facilities: Palomar 60-in. (SEDM)
Software: pandas (pandas development team 2020),
NumPy (Harris et al. 2020), astropy (Astropy Collaboration et al. 2013, 2018), Keras (Chollet et al. 2015),
TensorFlow (Abadi et al. 2015)

APPENDIX

A. SNID ROC CURVE

To construct the SNID ROC curve of Figure 4, we ran SNID on our gold and bronze test sets with the following
settings. We set lapmin = 0.1, rlapmin = 0, set ‘Ia’ and ‘notSN’ as template types to avoid (as we wanted to obtain
only CCSN predictions), set maximum redshift zmax = 0.2, and ran SNID with interactive and plotting disabled on
all spectra. The top SNID match of each sample was set as the automatically predicted classification from SNID. For
the subset of spectra that did not get any template matches with the above settings, we gradually increased zmax
to 0.5 until all samples had at least one match. The predicted classifications were then labeled as H-rich or H-poor
based on the SNID assigned type, and the rlap scores were used to measure the confidence in those predictions. Then
to calculate the ROC curve, we used rlap thresholds in the range 0–25 with a step of 1, and at each threshold, we
calculated the true positive rate and the false positive rate, considering H-rich as the true positive class.
REFERENCES
Abadi, M., Agarwal, A., Barham, P., et al. 2015,

Bellm, E. C., Kulkarni, S. R., Barlow, T., et al. 2019,

TensorFlow: Large-Scale Machine Learning on

PASP, 131, 068003, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ab0c2a

Heterogeneous Systems. https://www.tensorflow.org/

Ben-Ami, S., Konidaris, N., Quimby, R., et al. 2012, in

Allam, Tarek, J., & McEwen, J. D. 2023, RAS Techniques

Proc. SPIE, Vol. 8446, Ground-based and Airborne

and Instruments, 3, 209, doi: 10.1093/rasti/rzad046
Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J.,
et al. 2013, A&A, 558, A33,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201322068
Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Sipőcz, B. M.,
et al. 2018, AJ, 156, 123, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aabc4f

Instrumentation for Astronomy IV, 844686,
doi: 10.1117/12.926317
Blagorodnova, N., Neill, J. D., Walters, R., et al. 2018,
PASP, 130, 035003, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aaa53f
Blondin, S., & Tonry, J. L. 2007, ApJ, 666, 1024,
doi: 10.1086/520494

19
Burhanudin, U. F., & Maund, J. R. 2022, Monthly Notices
of the Royal Astronomical Society, 521, 1601,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac3672
Cenko, S. B., Fox, D. B., Moon, D.-S., et al. 2006, PASP,
118, 1396, doi: 10.1086/508366
Chambers, K. C., Magnier, E. A., Metcalfe, N., et al. 2016,
The Pan-STARRS1 Surveys.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.05560
Charnock, T., & Moss, A. 2017, ApJL, 837, L28,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aa603d
Chen, T. W., Inserra, C., Fraser, M., et al. 2018, ApJL,
867, L31, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aaeb2e
Childress, M. J., Lidman, C., Davis, T. M., et al. 2017,
MNRAS, 472, 273, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx1872
Chollet, F., et al. 2015, Keras, GitHub.
https://github.com/fchollet/keras
Coughlin, M. W., Bloom, J. S., Nir, G., et al. 2023, ApJS,
267, 31, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/acdee1
Dekany, R., Smith, R. M., Riddle, R., et al. 2020, PASP,
132, 038001, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ab4ca2
Fremling, C., Miller, A. A., Sharma, Y., et al. 2020, ApJ,
895, 32, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab8943
Fremling, C., Hall, X. J., Coughlin, M. W., et al. 2021, The
Astrophysical Journal Letters, 917, L2,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac116f
Goldwasser, S., Yaron, O., Sass, A., et al. 2022, Transient
Name Server AstroNote, 191, 1
Graham, M. J., Kulkarni, S. R., Bellm, E. C., et al. 2019,
PASP, 131, 078001, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ab006c
Guillochon, J., Parrent, J., Kelley, L. Z., & Margutti, R.
2017, ApJ, 835, 64, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/835/1/64
Harris, C. R., Millman, K. J., van der Walt, S. J., et al.
2020, Nature, 585, 357, doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2
Harutyunyan, A. H., Pfahler, P., Pastorello, A., et al. 2008,
A&A, 488, 383, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20078859
Howell, D. 2019, in American Astronomical Society
Meeting Abstracts, Vol. 233, American Astronomical
Society Meeting Abstracts #233, 258.16
Howell, D. A., Sullivan, M., Perrett, K., et al. 2005, ApJ,
634, 1190, doi: 10.1086/497119
Ivezić, Ž., Kahn, S. M., Tyson, J. A., et al. 2019, ApJ, 873,
111, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab042c
Kangas, T., Kuncarayakti, H., Nagao, T., et al. 2024, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2401.17423,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2401.17423
Kasliwal, M. M., Cannella, C., Bagdasaryan, A., et al.
2019, PASP, 131, 038003, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aafbc2
Kim, Y. L., Rigault, M., Neill, J. D., et al. 2022, PASP,
134, 024505, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ac50a0

Kim, Y.-L., Hook, I., Milligan, A., et al. 2024, Publications
of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 136, 114501,
doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ad85cd
Lezmy, J., Copin, Y., Rigault, M., Smith, M., & Neill, J. D.
2022, A&A, 668, A43, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202244740
Mahabal, A., Sheth, K., Gieseke, F., et al. 2017, in 2017
IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence
(SSCI), Vol. 39 (IEEE), 1–8,
doi: 10.1109/ssci.2017.8280984
Masci, F. J., Laher, R. R., Rusholme, B., et al. 2019,
PASP, 131, 018003, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aae8ac
Milisavljevic, D., Margutti, R., Kamble, A., et al. 2015,
ApJ, 815, 120, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/815/2/120
Möller, A., & de Boissière, T. 2020, MNRAS, 491, 4277,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz3312
Muthukrishna, D., Narayan, G., Mandel, K. S., Biswas, R.,
& Hložek, R. 2019, PASP, 131, 118002,
doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ab1609
Muthukrishna, D., Parkinson, D., & Tucker, B. E. 2019,
The Astrophysical Journal, 885, 85,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab48f4
Nordin, J., Brinnel, V., van Santen, J., et al. 2019, A&A,
631, A147, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201935634
pandas development team, T. 2020, pandas-dev/pandas:
Pandas, latest, Zenodo, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.3509134
Pasquet, J., Pasquet, J., Chaumont, M., & Fouchez, D.
2019, A&A, 627, A21, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201834473
Patterson, M. T., Bellm, E. C., Rusholme, B., et al. 2019,
PASP, 131, 018001, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aae904
Perley, D. A., Fremling, C., Sollerman, J., et al. 2020, The
Astrophysical Journal, 904, 35,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abbd98
Qu, H., & Sako, M. 2022, The Astronomical Journal, 163,
57, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac39a1
Rehemtulla, N., Miller, A., Fremling, C., et al. 2023,
Transient Name Server AstroNote, 265, 1
Rehemtulla, N., Miller, A. A., Jegou Du Laz, T., et al.
2024, ApJ, 972, 7, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad5666
Rigault, M., Neill, J. D., Blagorodnova, N., et al. 2019,
A&A, 627, A115, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201935344
Shappee, B., Prieto, J., Stanek, K. Z., et al. 2014, in
American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts, Vol.
223, American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts
#223, 236.03
Sharma, Y., Sollerman, J., Kulkarni, S. R., et al. 2024,
ApJ, 966, 199, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad3758
Smartt, S. J., Valenti, S., Fraser, M., et al. 2015, A&A, 579,
A40, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201425237
Sollerman, J., Fransson, C., Barbarino, C., et al. 2020,
A&A, 643, A79, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202038960

20

Sharma et al.

Tonry, J., & Davis, M. 1979, AJ, 84, 1511,
doi: 10.1086/112569
Tonry, J. L., Denneau, L., Heinze, A. N., et al. 2018,
Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific,
130, 064505, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aabadf
van der Walt, S. J., Crellin-Quick, A., & Bloom, J. S. 2019,
Journal of Open Source Software, 4,
doi: 10.21105/joss.01247

Yuan, F., Lidman, C., Davis, T. M., et al. 2015, MNRAS,
452, 3047, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv1507

