=== PAGE 1 ===
Draft version June 7, 2021
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX63
Alert Classification for the ALeRCE Broker System: The Real-time Stamp Classifier
arXiv:2008.03309v2 [astro-ph.IM] 3 Jun 2021
R. Carrasco-Davis ,1, 2, ∗ E. Reyes ,1, 2, ∗ C. Valenzuela ,3, 1, 4, 5 F. Förster ,3, 1, 6 P. A. Estévez ,1, 2
G. Pignata ,7, 1 F. E. Bauer ,8, 1, 9 I. Reyes ,1, 3, 2 P. Sánchez-Sáez ,1, 10, 8, 4 G. Cabrera-Vives ,11, 1
S. Eyheramendy ,4, 1 M. Catelan ,8, 1 J. Arredondo,1 E. Castillo-Navarrete,3, 1 D. Rodrı́guez-Mancini,1, 11
D. Ruz-Mieres ,3, 1, 12 A. Moya ,1, 3 L. Sabatini-Gacitúa,1, 3 C. Sepúlveda-Cobo,1, 3 A. A. Mahabal,13, 14
J. Silva-Farfán,6 E. Camacho-Iñiguez,8 and L. Galbany15
1 Millennium Institute of Astrophysics (MAS), Nuncio Monseñor Sótero Sanz 100, Providencia, Santiago, Chile
2 Department of Electrical Engineering, Universidad de Chile, Av. Tupper 2007, Santiago 8320000, Chile
3 Center for Mathematical Modeling, Universidad de Chile, Beauchef 851, North building, 7th floor, Santiago 8320000, Chile
4 Faculty of Engineering and Sciences, Universidad Adolfo Ibañez, Diagonal Las Torres 2700, Peñalolén, Santiago, Chile
5 Data Observatory, Santiago, Chile
6 Departamento de Astronomı́a, Universidad de Chile, Casilla 36D, Santiago, Chile
7 Departamento de Ciencias Fı́sicas, Universidad Andres Bello, Av. Republica 230, Santiago 8370146, Chile
8 Instituto de Astrofı́sica and Centro de Astroingenierı́a, Facultad de Fı́sica, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Casilla 306,
Santiago 22, Chile
9 Space Science Institute, 4750 Walnut Street, Suite 205, Boulder, Colorado 80301, USA
10 Inria Chile Research Center, Av. Apoquindo 2827, Las Condes, Chile
11 Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Concepción, Edmundo Larenas 219, Concepción, Chile
12 Institute of Astronomy, University of Cambridge, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 0HA, UK
13 Cahill Center for Astrophysics, California Institute of Technology, 1200 E. California Boulevard, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
14 Center for Data Driven Discovery, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
15 Departamento de Fı́sica Teórica y del Cosmos, Universidad de Granada, E-18071 Granada, Spain
ABSTRACT
We present a real-time stamp classifier of astronomical events for the ALeRCE (Automatic Learning
for the Rapid Classification of Events) broker. The classifier is based on a convolutional neural network,
trained on alerts ingested from the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF). Using only the science, reference
and difference images of the first detection as inputs, along with the metadata of the alert as features,
the classifier is able to correctly classify alerts from active galactic nuclei, supernovae (SNe), variable
stars, asteroids and bogus classes, with high accuracy (∼94%) in a balanced test set. In order to
find and analyze SN candidates selected by our classifier from the ZTF alert stream, we designed
and deployed a visualization tool called SN Hunter, where relevant information about each possible
SN is displayed for the experts to choose among candidates to report to the Transient Name Server
database. From June 26th 2019 to February 28th 2021, we have reported 6846 SN candidates to date
(11.8 candidates per day on average), of which 971 have been confirmed spectroscopically. Our ability
to report objects using only a single detection means that 70% of the reported SNe occurred within
one day after the first detection. ALeRCE has only reported candidates not otherwise detected or
selected by other groups, therefore adding new early transients to the bulk of objects available for
early follow-up. Our work represents an important milestone toward rapid alert classifications with
the next generation of large etendue telescopes, such as the Vera C. Rubin Observatory.
Keywords: Supernovae — Alert Broker Visualization Tools — Deep Learning
Corresponding author: Rodrigo Carrasco-Davis
rodrigo.carrasco.davis@gmail.com
rodrigo.carrasco.d@ing.uchile.cl
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work
1. INTRODUCTION
The amount of data generated by modern survey telescopes cannot be directly handled by humans. Therefore, automatic data analysis methods are necessary to
=== PAGE 2 ===
2
R. Carrasco-Davis and E. Reyes
fully exploit their scientific return. A particularly challenging problem is the real-time classification of transient events. Nevertheless, the possibility to generate a
quick probabilistic evaluation of which type of transient
has been discovered is crucial to perform the most suitable follow-up observation, and by extension obtain the
best constraints on its physics. In this work we focus on
the early detection of supernovae (SNe) by quickly discerning between SNe and various other confusing classes
of astronomical objects. Photometric and spectroscopic
observations carried out soon after the explosion are fundamental to put constraints on the progenitor systems
and explosion physics.
In the case of thermonuclear explosions (Type Ia
SNe), early observations probe the outermost part of
the ejecta, where it is possible to detect the material
present at the surface of the progenitor (e.g., Nugent
et al. 2011), evaluate the degree of mixing induced by
different explosion models (e.g., Piro & Morozova 2016;
Jiang et al. 2017; Noebauer et al. 2017), and estimate
the size of the companion star (e.g., Kasen 2010).
For core collapse (CC) SNe, observations carried out
soon after the explosion can constrain the radius of the
progenitor star, its outer structure and the degree of
56
Ni mixing (e.g., Tominaga et al. 2011; Piro & Nakar
2013), but also the immediate SN environment, providing a critical diagnostic for the elusive final evolutionary
history of the progenitor and/or the progenitor system
configuration (e.g., Moriya et al. 2011; Gal-Yam et al.
2014; Groh 2014; Khazov et al. 2016; Tanaka et al. 2016;
Yaron et al. 2017; Morozova et al. 2017; Förster et al.
2018).
We propose a method to quickly classify alerts among
five different classes, four of which are astrophysical, and
then use the predictions to find and report SNe. This
work has been developed in the framework of ALeRCE1
(Automatic Learning for the Rapid Classification of
Events; Förster et al. 2021). The ALeRCE system is
able to read, annotate, classify and redistribute the data
from large survey telescopes. Such efforts are commonly
called Astronomical Broker Systems (other examples include, e.g., ANTARES, Narayan et al. 2018; Lasair,
Smith et al. 2019). Currently, ALeRCE is processing
the alert stream generated by the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF; Bellm et al. 2018) and its main goal is to
reliably classify data of non-moving objects, and make
these classifications available to the scientific community.
1 https://alerce.online/
For the purpose of classifying astronomical objects or
transients, one way to discriminate among them is by
computing features from the light curve of each object (e.g., Richards et al. 2011; Pichara et al. 2016;
Martı́nez-Palomera et al. 2018; Boone 2019; SánchezSáez et al. 2021), or using the light curve directly as input to a classifier (e.g., Mahabal et al. 2017; Naul et al.
2018; Muthukrishna et al. 2019; Becker et al. 2020). In
the case of an alert stream scenario such as for ZTF
(whereby no forced photometry of past images is provided as of February 2021), the light curve is built by estimating the flux from the difference image for all alerts
triggered at the same coordinates.
Our model is dubbed the “stamp classifier”, since
it only uses the first alert of an astronomical object. ALeRCE also developed a light curve classifier
(Sánchez-Sáez et al. 2021) based on light curves with
≥ 6 detections in g or ≥ 6 detections in r ZTF bands.
The light curve classifier is able to discriminate among
a richer taxonomy of astronomical objects. Both the
stamp and light curve classifiers are currently running
through the ALeRCE frontend (Förster et al. 2021).
Our proposed stamp classifier is based on a convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture that uses only
the information available in the first alert of an astronomical object, which includes the images of the objects
plus metadata regarding some of the object properties,
observing conditions and information from other catalogs. The images included in the alert correspond to
the science, reference and difference images, which are
shown in Figure 1 and described in Section 2. The stamp
classifier uses the first alert to discriminate between active galactic nuclei (AGN), supernovae (SNe), variable
stars (VS), asteroids and bogus alerts. The architecture
was designed to exploit the rotational invariance of astronomical images. The classifier was trained using an
entropy regularizer that avoids the assignment of high
probability to a single class, yielding softer output probabilities that give extra information to experts, useful for
further analysis of candidates. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first classifier that discriminates among
five classes using a single alert, allowing a rapid, reliable
characterization of the data stream to trigger immediate
follow-up. Previous work on stamp classification has focused instead on the classification of real objects vs. bogus detections (e.g., Goldstein et al. 2015; Cabrera-Vives
et al. 2017; Reyes et al. 2018; Duev et al. 2019; Turpin
et al. 2020), galaxy morphologies (e.g., Dieleman et al.
2015; Pérez-Carrasco et al. 2019; Barchi et al. 2020), or
time domain classification (Carrasco-Davis et al. 2019;
Gómez et al. 2020).
=== PAGE 3 ===
ALeRCE Stamp Classifier
An associated contribution to the stamp classifier is
the implementation of a visualization tool called SN
Hunter 2 , which allows experts to explore SN candidates
to further filter alerts, and choose objects to request
follow-up. This visualization tool is deployed online and
provides a snapshot of the current ZTF data stream
within minutes of receiving new alerts.
This work is structured as follows: In Section 2 we
describe the data used to train the proposed neural network model, as well as a brief description of each class
and how we gathered labeled data. In Section 3 we describe the data pre-processing, the neural network architecture, the entropy regularizer added to the optimization function and the experiments run to find the best
architecture for the problem at hand. In Section 4 we report and discuss our results in terms of the classification
task, we also analyze the contribution to the classification performance of each one of the three images in the
alert, as well as the metadata. In Section 5, we describe
the SN Hunter visualization tool and the visual criteria
used by human experts to choose good candidates to report to the Transient Name Server (TNS)3 , along with
an analysis of reported and confirmed SNe by ALeRCE
using the proposed methodology since June 2019. We
finally draw our conclusions and describe future work in
Section 6.
2. DATA
An alert within the ZTF stream is defined as a source
in the sky that produces a signal five standard deviations
higher than the background noise (a five-σ magnitude
limit; Masci et al. 2018), and which passes a real bogus filter designed by the ZTF collaboration (Mahabal
et al. 2019). When an alert is triggered, an alert packet
is generated with all the relevant information about the
source that triggered the alert (Bellm et al. 2018). The
alert packet contains three images called stamps, which
are cropped at 63 pixels on a side (1 pixel = 1 arcsec)
from the original image and centered on the position of
the source. In addition, the alert packet contains metadata related to the source, the observation conditions of
the exposure and other useful information (Masci et al.
2018). An example of the three stamps within an alert
packet is shown in Figure 1. The stamp in Figure 1a
is called the science image and corresponds to the most
recent measurement of the source. The stamp depicted
in Figure 1b is the reference image, which is fixed for a
given region and bandpass. It is usually based on images taken at the beginning of the survey and it is built
2 https://snhunter.alerce.online/
3 https://wis-tns.weizmann.ac.il/
3
by averaging multiple images to improve its signal-tonoise ratio. The stamp shown in Figure 1c is the difference image, between the science and reference images
(Masci et al. 2018), which shows the change in flux between those frames, removing other sources with constant brightness.
Each alert packet represents only 2 samples in time,
the reference and science image exposures, and often is
insufficient to correctly classify objects over the full taxonomy of different variable stars, transients or stochastic
sources as in Sánchez-Sáez et al. (2021).
However, our hypothesis is that it is feasible to use the
information included in a single alert packet to separate
objects into several broad classes, namely AGN, SNe,
VS, asteroids and bogus alerts. Each class presents distinctive characteristics within the image triplet of the
first detection alert (see Figure 2), which could be automatically learned by a CNN. In addition to the images,
information in the metadata in the alert packet along
with some derived features from the metadata are important to discriminate among the mentioned classes.
The metadata used for the classification task is listed in
Table 1, and the distribution of values for each feature
per class is shown in Figure A1 in Appendix A. Some
of the distinctive characteristics and metadata features
that help to distinguish between objects of each class,
are the following:
• AGN: Being stochastically variable objects, an alert
generated by an AGN should have flux from the source
in both the reference and science stamps. Considering this feature alone, it is difficult to discriminate AGNs from other variable sources. Nevertheless,
AGNs should lie at the centers of their host galaxies (based on dynamical friction arguments), or appear as (quasi-)stellar objects, in relatively lower stellar density fields. Thus, a change in flux will appear
as a variable source, which may lie at the center of
a galaxy, or even when the galaxy is not visible they
tend to be in lower stellar density fields. In these
cases, the alert is likely to be triggered by an AGN.
In addition, AGNs are commonly found outside the
Galactic plane, as shown in Appendix A. The important metadata features that characterize AGNs are
the Star/Galaxy score, or sgscores of the first, second and third closest source from PanSTARRS1 catalog which tend to have values closer to 0 (i.e., extended), since AGNs occur in the center of extended
galaxies, and the distance of the first, second and third
closest sources in PanSTARRS1 catalog, which should
have distpsnr1 values consistent with zero since the
nearest source should be the AGN itself, combined
with large distpsnr2 and distpsnr3 values due to
=== PAGE 4 ===
4
R. Carrasco-Davis and E. Reyes
(a) Science
(b) Reference
(c) Difference
(d) Colored Image
Figure 1. Example g-band images from a ZTF alert packet, in this case from a type Ia SN (ZTF19abmolyr) classified by our
method. (a) The science image is the latest measurement of a source. (b) The reference image is usually a higher signal-to-noise
measurement taken from an earlier epoch. (c) The third stamp is the difference between the reference and science images. (d)
For context, we also show the gri color image from PanSTARRS, which is not part of the alert packet nor used in the current
stamp classifier. Each image stamp is 63×63 pixels, where 1 pixel = 1 arcsec.
the lower source density outside of the Galactic plane.
The classtar is also useful as more weakly accreting
AGN candidates tend to be classified as galaxy-shaped
sources by the SExtractor classifier (Bertin & Arnouts
1996).
• Supernovae (SNe): An alert generated by a SN
should appear as a change in flux where no unresolved
sources were present. These transients tend to appear
near their host galaxies, and their location should be
consistent with the underlying host stellar population
distribution (e.g., a SN will have a higher probability of arising from a location aligned with the disk
than perpendicular to it). As such, most SN detections exhibit a visible host galaxy in both the science
and reference stamps, with the flux from the SN arising only in the science and difference images. SN
candidates tend to appear outside the Galactic plane,
and so the sgscores, distpsnr, and Galactic latitude features have similar distributions to AGN candidates. However, there are other features that might
help to classify SN candidates correctly. For instance,
the chi and sharpparameters from DAOPhot (Stetson 1987), or chinr and sharpnr, of the nearest source
in reference image PSF-catalog within 30 arcsec, have
different distributions for the SN class, compared to
the other classes (see Appendix A). Furthermore,the
isdiffpos value, which measures whether the candidate is positive or negative in the science minus reference subtraction, should always be 1 for new SN
candidates.
• Variable Stars (VS): The flux coming from variable
stars usually appears in both the reference and science stamps. With ZTF’s sensitivity, variable stars
can be detected within the Milky Way or the Local
Group, and thus the alert will typically not be associated with a visible host galaxy in the stamp, but
rather with other point-like sources. In addition, such
alerts will have a higher probability of residing at lower
Galactic latitudes and in crowded fields with multiple point sources within the stamps, given the high
concentration of stars in the disk and bulge of our
Galaxy. Therefore, VS candidates present a distribution of higher sgscores, lower distpsnr and Galactic
latitude closer to 0 compared to AGN and SN candidates (see Figure A1).
• Asteroids: Alerts from moving Solar-system objects
will appear only one time at a given position, and
thus will show flux only in the science and difference
images. Depending on their distance and apparent
speed, they may appear elongated in the direction of
motion. In addition, such alerts should have a higher
probability of residing at lower ecliptic latitudes as
shown in Figure A1. Also, new asteroid candidates
should always have an isdiffpos feature equal to 1.
• Bogus alerts: Camera and telescope optics effects,
such as saturated pixels at the centers of bright
sources, bad columns, hot pixels, astrometric misalignment in the subtraction to compute the difference
image, unbaffled internal reflections, etc., can produce
bogus alerts with no interesting real source. Bogus
alerts are characterized by the presence of NaN pixels due to saturation, single or multiple bright pixels
with little or no spatial extension (i.e., smaller than
the telescope point spread function PSF and nightly
seeing), or lines with high or low pixel values that extend over a large portion of the stamp (hot or cold
columns/rows). We are currently working to include
satellites in this class. However, they may share some
=== PAGE 5 ===
5
ALeRCE Stamp Classifier
image traits with asteroids, but are not confined to
the ecliptic. According to the estimates shown in section E of the Appendix, bogus alerts comprise a big
portion of the total of alerts generated each night by
ZTF, with ∼20% of all alerts being bogus, and a ∼60%
of them having a single detection. These estimates
were carried out by applying the stamp classifier over
176,376 alerts generated by ZTF’s stream. In the same
section, we present a more thorough characterization
and definition of the nine types of bogus we have found
in ZTF’s alert stream.
We built a training set of ZTF alerts using the labeled set from Sánchez-Sáez et al. (2021), which is a
result of cross-matching with other catalogs, such as
the ASAS-SN catalogue of variable stars (Jayasinghe
et al. 2018, 2019a,b, 2020), the Roma-BZCAT MultiFrequency Catalog of Blazars (Massaro et al. 2015),
the Million Quasars Catalog (version June 2019, Flesch
2015, 2019), the New Catalog of Type 1 AGNs (Oh2015;
Oh et al. 2015), the Catalina Surveys Variable Star Catalogs (Drake et al. 2014, 2017), the LINEAR catalog of
periodic light curves (Palaversa et al. 2013), Gaia Data
Release 2 (Mowlavi et al. 2018; Rimoldini et al. 2019),
the SIMBAD database (Wenger et al. 2000), and spectroscopically classified SNe from the TNS database. The
asteroid subset was built by selecting the alerts that were
near a Solar-system object, requiring that the ssdistnr
field in the alert metadata exists. Each sample corresponds to the triplet of science, reference, and difference
images of the first detection. The number of samples
of AGN, SN, VS, asteroid, and bogus are 14,966 (29%),
1620 (3%), 14,996 (29%), 9899 (19%), and 10,763 (20%),
respectively, with a total of 52,244 examples (undersampling the labeled set from Sánchez-Sáez et al. (2021) for
better balance between classes since 3% SNe would not
exactly be considered balanced compared to the rest).
The bogus class was built in two steps: We first used step
1 bogus, composed by 1980 bogus examples reported by
ZTF (based on human inspection) and ran an initial iteration of the proposed classifier detailed in Section 3.2.
Then, we added step 2 bogus, where another 8783 bogus
samples were labeled by our team of experts using the
SN Hunter and added to the training set by manually
inspecting the samples predicted by an early version of
the model as SNe.
Appendix E contains an analysis of bogus alerts
present in the training set. Briefly, Figure A5 shows
the distribution of different types of bogus alerts in our
labeled set, whereby an expert manually assigned type
labels to a representative subset of 1,000 bogus samples.
We stress here that bogus class generation is an ongoing process with different stages that involves labeling
Table 1. List of metadata of the alert used as features by the
classifier. The definitions are from the ZTF avro schemasa .
Feature
Description [units]
sgscore{1,
2, 3}
Star/Galaxy score of the {first, second, third} closest source from PanSTARRS1 catalog 0 ≤ sgscore
≤ 1 where a value closer to 1 implies higher likelihood of being a star, -999 when there is no source.
Distance of the {first, second, third} closest source
from PanSTARRS1 catalog, if one exists within 30
arcsec, -999 if there is no source [arcsec].
t (converted to 1) if the candidate is from positive
(science minus reference) subtraction; f (converted
to 0) if the candidate is from negative (reference
minus science) subtraction.
Full Width Half Max assuming a Gaussian core
of the alert candidate in the science image from
SExtractor (Bertin & Arnouts 1996) [pixels].
magnitude from PSF-fit photometry of the alert
candidate in the difference image. [mag].
1-sigma uncertainty in magpsf [mag].
Right ascension and declination of candidate;
J2000 [deg].
5-sigma mag limit in difference image based on
PSF-fit photometry [mag].
Star/Galaxy classification score of the alert candidate in the science image, from SExtractor.
Number of spatially-coincident detections falling
within 1.5 arcsec going back to beginning of survey; only detections that fell on the same field and
readout-channel ID where the input candidate was
observed are counted. All raw detections down to
a photometric Signal/Noise≈3 are included.
Number of times input candidate position fell on
any field and readout-channel going back to beginning of survey.
DAOPhot (Stetson 1987) chi, sharp parameters
of nearest source in reference image PSF-catalog
within 30 arcsec.
ecliptic latitude and longitude computed from the
ra, dec coordinates of the candidate [deg].
distpsnr
{1, 2, 3}
isdiffpos
fwhm
magpsf
sigmapsf
ra, dec
diffmaglim
classtar
ndethist
ncovhist
chinr,
sharpnr
Ecliptic
coordinates
Galactic
coordinates
approx
nondetections
Galactic latitude and longitude computed from the
ra, dec coordinates of the candidate [deg].
ncovhist minus ndethist. Approximate number
of observation in the position of the candidate,
with a signal lower than Signal/Noise≈3.
a https://zwickytransientfacility.github.io/ztf-avro-alert/
by hand. To highlight the current state, we made a 2D
U-MAP projection of the bogus samples alongside SNe,
differentiating both stages of a 2-step bogus labelling
system. This projection, shown in Figure A6, groups
alerts with similar triplet images as neighboring or adjacent points. Bogus alerts categorized by step 2 bogus
are within a big cluster that mainly overlaps with SNe,
which reflects the bias on how step 2 bogus alerts are
selected samples that were confused with SNe by early
=== PAGE 6 ===
6
R. Carrasco-Davis and E. Reyes
Active Galactic Nuclei
Supernovae
Variable Stars
Asteroids
Bogus
Figure 2. Examples of the five classes to be discriminated by using only the first detection. For each class, the triplet of images
in each row are science, reference and difference images from left to right. Each row corresponds to a different candidate.
versions of the stamp classifier. We continue adding new
bogus alerts in this way. In Appendix E, we analyze in
greater detail which type of bogus alerts are the most
representative of each of the 3 clusters present in the
U-MAP of Figure A6.
One final point to stress is that a key aim of the stamp
classifier is the fast detection of SNe, and therefore the
training set consists only of the initial alert from each
object, which allows us to estimate probabilities of objects as soon as we receive the alert.
3. METHODOLOGY
3.1. Data Pre-Processing
The standard shape for each stamp within an alert
is 63×63 pixels; 650 non-square shaped stamps were
removed from the dataset. After removing misshaped
stamps, we obtained 14,742 (29%) AGN, 1596 (3%) SN,
14,723 (29%) VS, 9799 (19%) asteroids and 10,734 (20%)
bogus alerts, with a total of 51,594 examples. Some pixels have NaN values due to pixel saturation, bad columns
or stamps from the edges of the camera; all NaN pixels
were replaced by a value of 0, giving information about
NaNs content within the stamp to the classifier. Preliminary tests showed that smaller images for training led to
better results, therefore we cropped all the stamps at the
center getting 21×21 pixels images; this size was selected
by the hyperparameter random search discussed in Section 3.5. Better results with a small stamp size may
be explained by the fact that smaller stamps means a
dimensionality reduction with respect to the original image size in the input of the CNN, and this may be easier
to handle by the model. Further analysis of the optimal
stamp size for the classification task at hand must be
carried out since it might be important for the design
of future alert stream based surveys. Each stamp was
normalized independently between 0 and 1 by subtract-
ing the minimum pixel value in the image, then dividing
by the maximum pixel value. Finally, a 3-channel cube
is assembled as input to the classifier, built by stacking
the resulting science, reference and difference images as
separate channels, resulting in a 21 × 21 × 3 image. The
metadata are clipped differently for each feature following the values in Table A1, then each feature is normalized by subtracting the mean value of the training set
and dividing by the standard deviation.
3.2. Classifier Architecture
The classification model is a CNN based on the realbogus classifier proposed by Reyes et al. (2018), which is
an improvement over Deep-HiTS (Cabrera-Vives et al.
2017) by adding rotational invariance to the CNN and
analyzing the predictions of the model using Layer-wise
Relevance Propagation (LRP; Bach et al. 2015). The
specific CNN architecture used in this work is shown in
Table 2. In these previous works, metadata were not
included for classification.
The input of the neural network has a shape of
21 × 21 × 3 as explained in Section 3.1. Following the
architecture of Reyes et al. (2018), a zero padding is
applied to the input, to then augment the batch with
rotated versions of itself as described in Section 3.3.
For the convolutional layers, the parameters shown in
Table 2 are the filter dimensions and number of output channels. All convolutional layers, except for the
first one, have zero padding (filling the edges of the images with zeros) that preserves the input shape after
the convolution. Moroever, all the convolutional layers
and fully connected layers have a Rectified Linear Unit
(ReLU; Nair & Hinton 2010) activation function (except
for the last fully connected one that has a softmax output). The output of the last max-pooling layer, which
reduces the dimensionality of the image by selecting the
=== PAGE 7 ===
7
ALeRCE Stamp Classifier
largest values of non-overlapping windows of 2×2 pixels,
is re-arranged (flattened) to a single dimension array for
each sample in the batch, to feed the fully connected layers. Then, the rotation concatenation step takes place,
stacking the fully connected output representation of
the rotated versions of each sample, and passing them
through the cyclic pooling layer, where an average is applied in the stacked dimension. The metadata features
are first processed by a batch normalization layer that
learns an optimal bias and scale to normalize the data.
The normalized features are concatenated to the output
of the cyclic pooling. The concatenated representation
passes through two fully connected layers. Finally, a
softmax function is applied to the output of the last
fully connected layer to obtain the estimated probabilities for each of the five classes. A glossary about CNNs
and its training is presented in Appendix B.
Table 2. Convolutional neural network architecture.
Layer
Layer Parameters
Output Size
Input
Zero padding
Rotation
augmentation
Convolution
Convolution
Max-pooling
Convolution
Convolution
Convolution
Max-pooling
Flatten
Fully connected
Rotation
concatenation
Cyclic pooling
Concat with
BNa features
Fully connected
with dropout
Fully connected
Output softmax
-
21 × 21 × 3
27 × 27 × 3
27 × 27 × 3
4 × 4, 32
3 × 3, 32
2 × 2, stride 2
3 × 3, 64
3 × 3, 64
3 × 3, 64
2 × 2, stride 2,
2304 × 64
-
24 × 24 × 32
24 × 24 × 32
12 × 12 × 32
12 × 12 × 64
12 × 12 × 64
12 × 12 × 64
6 × 6 × 64
2304
64
4 × 64
-
64
64 + 23
90 × 64
64
64 × 64
64 × 5
64
5 (n classes)
◦
a BN stands for batch normalization
(e.g., Dieleman et al. 2015, 2016; Cabrera-Vives et al.
2017; Reyes et al. 2018). In this work, rotational invariance is achieved by feeding the neural network with
90◦ , 180◦ and 270◦ rotated versions of the original input batch x. Defining r as a 90◦ rotation operation,
then the samples within the extended batch will be
B(x) = [x, rx, r2 x, r3 x] after applying the rotations. At
the last step of the architecture before the softmax output layer, a cyclic pooling operation is performed, which
is basically an average pooling over the representation
of the dense layer for each rotated example. A scheme
of the procedure described in this section is shown in
Figure 3.
3.4. Entropy Regularization
When the CNN model is trained using cross-entropy
as the loss function to be minimized, the classification
confidence of the model is very high, resulting in a distribution of output probabilities with saturated values of
0s and 1s without populating the values in between, even
for wrong classifications. In this case there is no insight
of certainty (relative probabilities between classes) of the
prediction because most estimated probabilities for each
class were either 0 or 1. In order to provide more granularity to the astronomers, who revise SN candidates
based on the probability of the classification reported by
the model to later request follow-up observing time, we
added the entropy of the predicted probabilities of the
models as a regularization term, to be maximized during training (Pereyra et al. 2017). By maximizing the
entropy of the output probabilities, we penalize predictions with high confidence, in order to get better insight
in cases where the stamps seem equally likely to belong
to more than one class. The loss function L per sample
is as follows:
L=−
N
X
yc log (ŷc ) + β
c=1
|
N
X
ŷc log (ŷc ) ,
(1)
c=1
{z
cross-entropy
}
|
{z
}
entropy regularization
where N is the number of classes, yc is the one-hot encoding label (a value of 1 in the corresponding index of
class, and 0 for the rest) indexed by c, ŷc is the model
prediction for class c, and β controls the regularization
term in the loss function. Further explanation on the
role of the loss function in the training process of a neural network is given in Appendix B.
3.3. Rotational Invariance
Astronomical objects present within a stamp usually
have a random orientation. It has been shown that
imposing rotational invariance to a classifier improves
its cumulative accuracy for some classification problems
3.5. Experiments
A hyperparameter search was done by randomly sampling 133 combinations of the parameters shown in Table 3. For each combination of hyperparameters, we
=== PAGE 8 ===
8
R. Carrasco-Davis and E. Reyes
Difference
Dense
Reference
0°
Convolutional
Layers
Alert
Metadata
Concatenation
Batch
Normalization
Dense
Science
90°
180°
Convolutional
Layers
Dense
Softmax
Layer
Cyclic Pooling
Convolutional
Layers
Convolutional
Layers
270°
Figure 3. CNN enhanced with rotational invariance. The box Convolutional Layers refers to those described in Table 2,
from the first convolutional layer to the last pooling layer. For each sample, the science, reference and difference images are
concatenated in the channel dimension, obtaining an image input of dimension 21 × 21 × 3. For each sample within the sampled
batch, rotated versions are generated as described in Section 3.2 and fed to the CNN. After the first dense layer, the Cyclic
pooling is performed. The metadata features are passed through a batch normalization layer, and its output is concatenated
with the cyclic pooling output. Then, the concatenation goes through 2 fully connected layers, and finally a softmax function
is applied to estimate the output probabilities.
trained 5 networks with different initial random weights.
The initial maximum number of iterations (presenting a
single batch per iteration) was 30,000, evaluating the
loss in the validation set every 10 iterations to save the
best model thus far. After the first 20,000 iterations,
if a lower loss is found on the validation set, 10,000
more iterations are performed. The validation and testing subsets were sampled randomly only once, taking
100 samples per class from the whole dataset, obtaining 500 samples for each of the mentioned subsets. The
remaining samples were used in the training set. For
each training iteration, the batch was built to contain
roughly the same number of samples per class. We used
Adam (Kingma & Ba 2017) as the updating rule for the
network parameters during training, with β1 = 0.5 and
β2 = 0.9. Further details on the updating rules of a
neural network and the Adam optimizer are described
in Appendix B.
To account for the relevance of each part of the input,
which is comprised of the three images and metadata
features, we trained several versions of the stamp classifier, each of them with a different combination of images
and metadata features. First, we trained the stamp classifier using combinations of the three images (without
features). Second, we trained a random forest (Breiman
2001) to classify our training set but using the features
only, in order to obtain a feature importance ranking.
Table 3. Hyperparameter random search values.
Hyperparameter
Random Search Values
Learning rate
Regularization parameter (β)
Batch size
Image size
Dropout rate
CNN kernel size
5e-3, 1e-3, 5e-4, 1e-4, 5e-5
0, 0.3, 0.5, 0.8, 1.0
16, 32, 64
21, 41, 63
0.2, 0.5, 0.8
3, 5, 7
Once we got the feature importance, we trained different stamp classifier models (with the three images) by
adding one feature at a time, from the most important to
the least important according to the ranking, and measured the accuracy for the corresponding model with the
aggregated feature. For each of these models, we trained
the model 5 times to account for variance due to random
initialization parameters.
4. RESULTS
In this section, we first describe our results in terms
of the classification task for the five classes. Then, we
change our focus to the detection of SN candidates, since
our main interest in this work is to discover extremely
young transient candidates to be observed with follow-
=== PAGE 9 ===
9
ALeRCE Stamp Classifier
4 accuracy = N◦ correct classifications
Total N◦ of samples
AGN 0.95±0.01
0.04±0.01
0
SN 0.02±0.01 0.87±0.01
True label
up resources. Further applications of this early classification system might include rapid detection of extreme
variability in AGN or tracking solar system objects.
The following results correspond to the best model
(including metadata) in the search for hyperparameters,
which adopts a batch size of 64 samples, learning rate
of 1e-3, dropout rate of 0.5, CNN kernel size of 5, image size of 21 × 21 pixels, and regularization parameter of β = 0.5. Appendix C contains the details on
how this model was selected. We use accuracy4 to compare models since the validation and test sets are balanced; achieving 0.95 ± 0.005 in the validation set and
0.941 ± 0.004 in the test set.
Figure 4 shows the confusion matrix for the test
set consisting of using five realizations of the proposed
model. With our five class model, we recover 87 ± 1% of
the SNe, with only 5 ± 2% of false positives. For completeness, we also report the confusion matrix of the
stamp classifier when no metadata features are included
in the fully connected layers (see Figure A3), which has
a test-set accuracy of 0.883 ± 0.006, recovering 80 ± 2%
of the SNe in the test set, with 10±4% of false positives.
By inspecting the predictions made by our model for
each SN sample in the test set, we found that the results
are in agreement with our initial expectations regarding the class discrimination described in Section 2, and
the characteristics presented within the three stamps for
each sample. Figure 5 shows SNe examples from TNS
that have been correctly classified by our model, where
in most cases a host galaxy is present, which is a good
indicator of an alert triggered by a SN. In the examples
shown in Figures 5c and 5d, the second most likely class
is AGN, due to the spatial coincidence of the transient
with the center of the host galaxy.
In Figure 6, incorrectly classified examples are shown.
The examples in Figures 6a, 6b and 6c are SNe from
TNS classified as Asteroids by our model. The absence
of a host galaxy in these cases reduces the probability of an alert to be triggered by a SN. In the samples
shown in Figures 6d, the confusion occurs between SN
and bogus alerts. In this case, the confusion is likely
due to the small size of the point spread function (PSF)
for some observations, which leads to confusion between
true variables and hot pixels or cosmic rays (these often
appear as single or a few adjacent bright pixels on the
image).
It is worth highlighting again that the results of our
model are achieved using the first alert only. According
to the confusion matrix, the most probable missclassifi-
VS 0.03±0.0
0
0
0.97±0.0
0
0
0.09±0.01 0.03±0.01
0
0
asteroid
0
0.02±0.01 0.01±0.0 0.97±0.02
bogus
0
0.03±0.01 0.01±0.0 0.01±0.0 0.95±0.01
AGN
SN
VS
asteroid
Predicted label
0
bogus
Figure 4. Average confusion matrix for the test set using 5
different realizations of the stamp classifier with metadata.
cation for SN candidates are asteroid and bogus classes.
This confusion between SN, asteroids, and bogus could
be fixed by looking at the second alert of the same object. If the second alert exists, it is safe to discard the
bogus and asteroid classes, since it is extremely unlikely
that the same bogus error or a moving object will appear in the exact same location in consecutive images,
unless the alert is near a bright star that produces pixel
errors due to saturation.
An example of the effect of the regularization term
discussed in Section 3.4 is depicted in Figure 7. Considerable differences in the distribution of the predicted
probability for each class can be observed by varying
β between 0 and 1, since both terms in eq. 1 are expected values of log probabilities. In the case of β = 0,
the predictions are mostly saturated around 0 or 1 for
the SN, VS, Asteroids and Bogus alert classes, creating
difficulties to identify stamps that seem equally likely
to belong to more than one class, because every sample is mapped to similar levels of high certainty. As the
value of β increases, the saturation of predicted values
decreases, spreading the predicted probability distributions and emphasizing the different levels of certainty
between predictions of different samples. The order of
predicted probabilities for each sample does not change
significantly by varying β, achieving 99% of accuracy in
the test set by checking whether the correct label lies in
the highest two predicted probabilities for different β.
The use of regularization to find noticeable differences
in the predicted probabilities could be helpful to an ex-
=== PAGE 10 ===
10
R. Carrasco-Davis and E. Reyes
Predicted probabilities:
AGN: 0.074, SN: 0.7, VS: 0.089, asteroid: 0.082, bogus: 0.055
Predicted probabilities:
AGN: 0.084, SN: 0.648, VS: 0.106, asteroid: 0.078, bogus: 0.085
(a) Object ID: ZTF19abfdsbu
(b) Object ID: ZTF18acrdwcf
Predicted probabilities:
AGN: 0.196, SN: 0.568, VS: 0.062, asteroid: 0.097, bogus: 0.077
Predicted probabilities:
AGN: 0.324, SN: 0.37, VS: 0.072, asteroid: 0.137, bogus: 0.096
(c) Object ID: ZTF18abuhzfc
(d) Object ID: ZTF19abrirdm
Figure 5. Correctly classified SN examples, with their respective predicted probabilities according to the proposed model.
Panels (a) and (b) show typical examples of well-classified SNe, where the presence of a host galaxy within the stamps increases
the chances of a SN alert being triggered. Panels (c) and (d) show small confusions between SN and AGN, due to the spatial
coincidence of the transient with the center of the host galaxy.
Predicted probabilities:
AGN: 0.085, SN: 0.105, VS: 0.096, asteroid: 0.635, bogus: 0.078
Predicted probabilities:
AGN: 0.097, SN: 0.344, VS: 0.082, asteroid: 0.351, bogus: 0.127
(a) Object ID: ZTF18absoomk
(b) Object ID: ZTF19abmqasg
Predicted probabilities:
AGN: 0.083, SN: 0.208, VS: 0.101, asteroid: 0.535, bogus: 0.074
Predicted probabilities:
AGN: 0.114, SN: 0.25, VS: 0.095, asteroid: 0.086, bogus: 0.456
(c) Object ID: ZTF19aazlsfj
(d) Object ID: ZTF19abpbvsk
Figure 6. Incorrectly classified SN examples, with their respective predicted probabilities by the proposed model. In Panels
(a), (b) and (c), the SNe are classified as asteroids. The SN in panel (d) is classified as a bogus alert, which might be caused by
the small size of the PSF, confusing the classifier with a hot pixel or a cosmic ray, which usually occupies a very narrow portion
of the stamp at the center. In all cases, the absence of a clear host-galaxy within the stamps reduces the probability of a SN
alert being triggered.
=== PAGE 11 ===
ALeRCE Stamp Classifier
pert for evaluating the output of the classifier, gaining
better insight into how reliable the classifications are.
As a consistency check, we predicted the classes of unlabeled candidates using the stamp classifier, in order to
compare their spatial distribution to the expected spatial locations for each class as mentioned in Section 2.
To gather the unlabeled candidates, we queried objects
using the ALeRCE API5 by selecting 390,498 first alerts
of different objects, chosen to be uniformly distributed
over the full sky coverage of ZTF, where 325,582 of the
alerts come from objects with > 1 alert (SNe, AGN, and
VS) and 64,916 come from objects with only 1 alert to
have a better representation of asteroids and bogus candidates. Figure 8 shows the spatial distribution of the
predictions made by our model over the unlabeled data.
As expected,due to extinction of extragalactic sources
(SNe and AGNs) in the Galactic plane, the spatial distribution for these sources has a lower density of predicted
candidates at low Galactic latitudes. On the contrary,
the spatial distribution of VS candidates is more concentrated toward the Galactic plane. In the case of asteroids, these are found near the ecliptic. It is also possible
to see a slight trend of predicted SNe near the ecliptic
due to the confusion with asteroids class when there is
no apparent host galaxy in the stamp, as shown in Figure 6. In addition, we show in Figure A4 in Appendix
D, the distribution for the same unlabeled data classified by the CNN without including features. It is noticeable the presence of predicted extragalactic objects
(SNe and AGNs) within the Galactic plane, and a higher
density of predicted asteroids far from the ecliptic. Even
though the images alone have important information to
classify the five classes, the metadata features are essential to improve the accuracy of the classifier in the
labeled dataset as shown in the Appendix D, in addition to obtain the expected spatial distribution for each
class.
We further extended our analysis by comparing the
predictions of our model in the unlabeled dataset, with
the ones made by the feature based light-curve classifier
from Sánchez-Sáez et al. (2021), which is able to classify
a finer taxonomy of objects, but it requires at least 6 detections in one of the two bands. For more details, see
Förster et al. (2021), Section 3.6. Here we summarize
the important results. The stamp classifier predictions
strongly agree with the ones of the light curve classifier. The stamp classifier finds 78% of the SN classified
by the light curve classifier, 85% for AGNs and 96% for
VS. The main confusions in the SN class (false positives)
5 https://alerceapi.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
11
are 9% of AGNs, 6% of VS, 4% of asteroids and 3% of
bogus. The false positives of AGNs are 4% of SN and 1%
of VS, and the confusion of VS is only 3% with AGNs.
Classifications of objects in the unlabeled set comparing
the light curve classifier and stamp classifier are shown
in Table A3. To further account for the performance of
the stamp classifier in the asteroids and bogus classes,
we randomly selected 20000 asteroids and 20000 bogus
objects predicted by the stamp classifier. The proportion of objects with a single detection as of February
2021 is 98% and 96%, for asteroids and bogus respectively for which we expect a single detection (except for
a small proportion of bogus).
To understand how the stamp classifier performs in
different conditions, we computed the probability assigned to alerts of each class in the training set as a function of the specific value of each of the features given to
the classifier; these probabilities are shown in Figures A7
and A8 in Appendix D. Here we can inspect for which
feature values does the probability assigned to the correct class decreases, showing the classifier performance
in different regimes. In what follows, we remark some
examples that support our hypotheses about class separability according to features mentioned in Section 2.
For example, variable stars with low sgscore1 are less
likely to be classified correctly, as well as variable stars
with higher distpsnr (Figures A7b, A7d and A7f), since
we anticipate that variable stars are in higher stellar density regions (i.e., in the plane or bulge of the Milky Way).
In the case of photometry measurements, variable stars
have a lower probability of being correctly classified at
higher magnitudes, while AGN have a higher probability of getting correctly classified. The inverse is true for
sigmapsf (Figure A7i and A7j respectively), which is
probably due to the higher error in the estimated magnitude owing to the host galaxy in the case of AGNs,
which is not present in variable stars. We can see that
the assigned probability to asteroids decays far from the
ecliptic in Figure A8e in line with their known distribution, while the probability assigned to AGN is lower
near the Galactic plane in Figure A8g due to dust extinction. In Figure A8l the probability assigned to each
class is shown for different values of SNR. Higher values
of SNR means less probability of being an AGN, since
these objects are distant and are usually found within
a host galaxy, the SNR for the AGN source is smaller.
Note that the SNR is not added as a feature to the classifier, but it is encoded in the photometry features magpsf
and sigmapsf from which we computed the SNR.
We use the stamp classifier on a daily basis to filter suitable SN candidates to report for follow-up. The
=== PAGE 12 ===
12
R. Carrasco-Davis and E. Reyes
beta 1.0
beta 0.5
beta 0
Active Galactic Nuclei
20
15
10
5
0
20
15
10
5
0
20
15
10
5
0
Supernovae
Variable Stars
Asteroids
Bogus
AGN
SN
VS
asteroid
bogus
class probability
class probability
class probability
class probability
class probability
class probability
class probability
class probability
class probability
class probability
0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9
class probability
class probability
class probability
class probability
class probability
Figure 7. Probability distribution for each of the classes in the training set, for different values of the regularization constant
β = {0, 0.5, 1.0}. For the model without regularization (β = 0 shown on the top plot), the probability distribution saturates to
1 or 0. Increasing β to 0.5 or 1.0 decreases the saturation and spreads the distribution of predictions made by the model (mid
and bottom plots).
Figure 8. Spatial distribution for the unlabeled data, and distribution of predictions per class. The colorbar indicates the
density of points. The ecliptic is shown with a yellow line with black edges. The distributions are shown as a 2d histogram
of density of alerts. Extragalactic sources (SNe and AGNs) are found outside the Galactic plane. On the contrary, VS are
concentrated in the Galactic plane. Asteroids are near the ecliptic.
filtered candidates are inspected by experts6 to choose
the most reliable candidates to report among the ones
indicated by the classifier. Therefore, it is important
to control the false positive ratio and the amount of
classified SNe events. To understand this trade-off, we
computed the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC)
curves depicted in Figure 11. To build the ROC curve,
6 For a full list of reporters, please check the list of reported objects
by ALeRCE in TNS, such as https://www.wis-tns.org/object/
2021mfa.
we converted the classification problem into a detection
problem by making a binary classification between SN
vs. the rest of the classes (AGN, VS, asteroids and bogus alerts). Using the predicted probabilities in the test
set of each alert being a SN, we varied the threshold
value (minimum probability) necessary to assign the SN
class to an alert and change the operation regime of the
model. By choosing a high SN probability threshold, the
false positive ratio can be reduced in order to decrease
the number of false candidates in the list for inspection
by experts, while keeping a high true positive ratio. For
=== PAGE 13 ===
ALeRCE Stamp Classifier
instance, for a SN probability threshold of 0.1, 0.2 and
0.5, the false positive ratio is 0.87, 0.03 and 0.01 respectively, while the true positive ratio is 0.94, 0.92 and 0.83,
respectively. Our model is suitable to be used to process
large volumes of alerts, when limited resources for manual inspection and confirmation by means of follow-up
observations are available.
4.1. Images and Metadata Feature relevance
In this section, we explain the results of the experiments designed to account for the relevance of each
image in the input (science, difference, and template)
and the importance of each feature in the classification.
Figure 9 shows the results of training the stamp classifier with a different combination of the input images.
Here we highlight the main conclusions from these experiments. When using a single image as input, the image that gives the most accuracy is the template image.
We hypothesize that the template image gives information about the context of the alert (e.g., stellar density,
host galaxy, bright star, no counterpart), which is valuable information for the specific classes we are trying to
correctly classify, as explained in Section 2. Notably,
the template image has a better signal to noise ratio
than the science image (which also contains contextual
information), explaining the difference in the accuracy
of the stamp classifier model when trained on each of
these. Surprisingly, using two images (science and template, or difference and template) as inputs, considerably improves the classification accuracy, almost reaching the accuracy of using the three images at the same
time. This result could be considered when designing
alert based surveys where bandwidth or storage of the
alert streaming is an important restriction, but still the
best accuracy is achieved when using the three images
combined to train the model.
For analyzing the relevance of each metadata feature for classification of the alerts, we trained a random forest to classify the alerts only using the features,
as mentioned in Section 3.5 to obtain a feature importance ranking. The feature importance ranking is
shown in Figure 10a, where the highest score feature is
distpsnr1, which indicates the distance to the first closest source from PanSTARRS1 catalog, giving a measure
of the density of objects near the alert and providing important context information. Another relevant feature
is sharpnr, which is useful to discriminate the SN class
among the others. Notice the relevance of the Galactic and ecliptic latitudes. The former provides context
for stars (which have a higher probability of lying at
low Galactic latitude) and extragalactic sources (which
have a lower source density at low Galactic latitudes due
13
to extinction), while the latter provides context for asteroids (which have a higher probability of lying at low
ecliptic latitude). To assess the impact of each feature in
the stamp classifier accuracy, we trained different models by adding one feature at a time in the order given by
the feature ranking (from more important to less important) as detailed in Section 3.5. The change in accuracy
for each combination of accumulated features is shown
in Figure 10b. The model gets higher accuracies for
both, validation and test sets, by adding more features
up to the galactic latitude feature, where the accuracy
in the validation set goes further up compared to the
test set. We interpret this as a sort of overfitting to
the validation set, which in this particular case is not
harmful to the performance of the model because the
accuracy on the test set still increases and converges to
a value when including additional features, without any
statistically significant drop. We argue that while the
accuracy on the test set does not drop, adding a new
feature might be valuable extra information to the classifier, but further checking is needed in a larger set. For
instance, using the predictions by the light curve classifier by Sánchez-Sáez et al. 2021 in the cases of SN, AGN
and VS classes, or number of detections in the asteroid
and bogus classes, as mentioned in Section 4.
5. MODEL DEPLOYMENT AND SN HUNTER
The SN Hunter (https://snhunter.alerce.online) is a
visualization tool that allows the user to inspect SN candidates classified by the model in real time, in order to
select good targets for follow-up observations. The interface of the SN Hunter is shown in Fig. 12. At the
left of the interface, a celestial map shows the position
of each candidate with a circle, where the size of the circle is proportional to the class probability assigned by
our model, with the map centered on the right ascension (ra) and declination (dec) coordinates of the alert.
The Milky Way plane is highlighted by the regions with
lighter shades of purple. The green curve in the map represents the ecliptic, where SN candidate alerts are more
likely to be triggered by asteroids instead of real SNe.
The right side of the interface provides a table where
the highest probability SN candidates are listed. The
table shows the ZTF Object ID which uniquely identifies each astronomical alert, the discovery date specifying day, month, year and time where the first alert was
triggered, the corresponding SN probability (score) from
the stamp classifier, and the number of available alerts
in the r and g bands (#Obs) since the discovery date.
The list can be sorted by object, discovery date, score or
number of alerts. The total number of high probability
candidates shown in the table and maximum age of the
=== PAGE 14 ===
14
R. Carrasco-Davis and E. Reyes
0.90
Test accuracy
0.85
0.80
0.75
0.70
0.65
Scie
Tempnlactee,
Difference,
Images used
Scie
Tempnlactee,
Tem
Differpelantcee,
Sc
Diffeiernencec,e
Template
Science
Difference
0.60
Figure 9. Accuracy of stamp classifier model when varying the images available at the input, isolated points are outliers. As
we can observe, the most important image is the template, which gives information about nearby objects and context to the
classifier, as well as the science image, which is slightly less informative according to the test accuracy, probably due to the higher
noise compared to the template. Using the three images at the same time is better, but surprisingly not much better compared
with using the science plus template, or difference plus template. This might be important to consider for classification purposes
when designing alert based surveys such as LSST.
0.96
distpsnr1
sharpnr
magpsf
non_detections
chinr
sigmapsf
ncovhist
ndethist
sgscore1
classtar
ecl_lat
fwhm
gal_lat
isdiffpos
dec
ra
ecl_long
gal_long
diffmaglim
distpsnr2
distpsnr3
sgscore2
sgscore3
Accuracy
0.94
0.92
0.90
0.88
0.05
0.10
0.15
Relative feature importance
(a) Average feature importance according to
10 random forest classifiers trained to predict
the label only using the metadata features.
distpsnr1 (1)
sharpnr (2)
magpsf (3)
non_detections (4)
sigmapsf (5)
chinr (6)
ncovhist (7)
ndethist (8)
sgscore1 (9)
classtar (10)
ecl_lat (11)
fwhm (12)
gal_lat (13)
isdiffpos (14)
dec (15)
ra (16)
ecl_long (17)
gal_long (18)
diffmaglim (19)
distpsnr2 (20)
distpsnr3 (21)
sgscore2 (22)
sgscore3 (23)
0.00
test
validation
Cumulative features used (Total number of features used)
(b) Accuracy of stamp classifier models when cumulative
adding one feature at a time according to the feature ranking
in (a).
Figure 10. Feature relevance analysis. The feature ranking in (a) was used to built stamp classifier models by aggregating
one feature at a time and evaluate its accuracy (b). We can see, for instance, that the galactic and ecliptic latitudes are
more important than longitude, since the former indicates the distance to the Galactic plane and ecliptic, which is useful for
classification. Also, we see that dispsnr1 is the most important feature as mentioned in Section 2, and also sharpnr which
helps to separate the SN class from the rest. This feature analysis is useful when using classification models that do not provide
the relevance of each input dimension explicitly.
=== PAGE 15 ===
1.00
0.95
th=0.1
th=0.2
0.90
0.85
th=0.5
0.80
0.75
0.70
0.65
0.60
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20
False positive
1.0
0.8
SN probability threshold
True positive
ALeRCE Stamp Classifier
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.25
0.30
0.0
Figure 11. ROC curve with SN detection threshold. The
colorbar shows the threshold that a sample’s predicted SN
probability must surpass in order to be assigned as a member of the SN class. For a SN probability threshold of 0.1,
0.2 and 0.5, the false positive ratio is 0.87, 0.03 and 0.01,
respectively, while the true positive ratio is 0.94, 0.92 and
0.83, respectively.
15
able in the main frontend of ALeRCE. The right panel of
Figure 13 provides the science, reference and difference
stamps of the first detection. It is also possible to sign in
with a user account and label candidates as either a possible SN or bogus by clicking the corresponding buttons
below the image stamps. These can be used to build up
larger training sets, as well as select candidates for the
Target and Observation Managers (TOMs).
We implemented the CNN stamp classifier using TensorFlow 1.14 (Martı́n Abadi et al. 2015) and deployed
it to classify the streaming alerts from ZTF’s Kafka
server8 . The timespan between a ZTF exposure and
its first arrival as an alert from the stream is 14.6 ± 4.5
minutes. Once the alert is received by ALeRCE, it takes
a few seconds for the candidate to be listed in the Supernova Hunter tool for expert inspection. Further details
about the complete processing pipeline are described in
Förster et al. (2021).
5.1. Additional Visual Selection Criteria
candidates can be modified by the user. By clicking on
a given candidate row, a new visualization panel is deployed as shown in Figure 13, with detailed information
for the selected candidate.
The visualization panel contains some metadata on
the left side (see Figure 13), including the ZTF Object ID (which is a clickable link to open the objects
as a new tab within the ALeRCE online main frontend,
https://alerce.online/), ra and dec coordinates of the
alert, the filter in which the first detection was made, the
PSF magnitude and the observation date. Below comes
the PanSTARRS cross-match information, containing
the Object ID, distance to the first closest known object,
and the classtar score of the first closest known object,
where a score closer to 1 implies higher likelihood of it
being a star. The buttons below this information, from
left to right, correspond to queries with the ALeRCE
frontend, the NASA Extragalactic Database (NED7 ),
TNS, and the Simbad Astronomical Database (Wenger
et al. 2000) around the position of the candidate. Finally, the full metadata associated with the first alert
of the SN candidate is linked below these buttons. The
middle panel of Figure 13 contains an interactive color
image from PanSTARRS DR1 (Chambers et al. 2019),
centered around the source using Aladin (Bonnarel et al.
2000; Boch & Fernique 2014); this image is also avail7 The NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database (NED) is operated by
the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under contract with the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration. https://ned.ipac.caltech.edu/
We note that the SN candidate sample presented in
this and the following subsections resulted from an older
version of the Stamp Classifier which relied only on the
three images within the first alert and did not use features for SN classification. Moreover, some of the filtering steps we applied manually are no longer necessary
now that features are included (we note these below). As
shown in Appendix D, even without the metadata features, the classifier provides reasonably high accuracy
(only 6% worse than the model with features). Regardless of whether features are included or not, we found it
critical to visually inspect the predicted SNe candidates
in order to weed out misclassifications and submit more
reliable candidates to TNS.
There are some common characteristics among the
higher confidence SN candidates. As mentioned in Section 2, most confirmed SNe are located on top or near an
extended galaxy. If there is no galaxy within the stamps,
then it is more likely that is a variable star or asteroid,
when the candidate is located near the ecliptic or the
Milky Way, respectively, or bogus. In some cases, it is
difficult to tell if the nearest source to the alert in the
science image is an extended galaxy or star; for these, a
search of archival catalogs and/or an assessment of the
spectral energy distribution can further aid classification. Therefore, the star galaxy score from PanSTARRS
in Figure 13 should be closer to 0, indicating that the
extended source is more likely to be an extended galaxy.
Real SN should have a positive flux in the difference im8 https://kafka.apache.org/
=== PAGE 16 ===
16
R. Carrasco-Davis and E. Reyes
Figure 12. SN Hunter, a tool for the visualization of SNe candidates. On the left side, the location of each candidate in sky
coordinates with respect to the Galactic plane and the ecliptic are depicted. On the right side, a selection of the top candidates
is listed, initially ordered by SN probability score from the stamp classifier. The list of candidates can be sorted by other
parameters, and updated/refreshed to include newly ingested alerts.
age, so we removed candidates that have negative flux
in the latter, by checking if the field isdiffpos value in
the metadata is false, this is automatically done in the
current pipeline. It is also important to check that the
object is visible in the difference image.
Another relevant feature is the shape of the candidate,
which should be similar to other stars with fuzzy edges
and generally symmetric in shape. If the shape of the
candidate is sharp (pixelized) or very localized, it might
be a cosmic ray or a defect of the CCD camera. Alternatively, if it is elongated, it could be an asteroid or a
satellite (often seen as a streak or multiple small dashes
due to rotational reflections). After doing all of these
checks, if the candidate is not convincing enough, then
it is helpful to look at the next detections when available and search for the characteristics mentioned, which
can be done using the ALeRCE frontend by clicking the
ALeRCE button in the SN Hunter tool and querying
directly that specific candidate’s data. The 100 highest
probability SNe candidates each day are manually inspected by astronomers of the ALeRCE team, and all
of them must be in agreement before a candidate is reported to TNS. As a qualitative analysis, we report that
the confusion of the SN class will depend on the weather.
In optimal weather conditions, the point spread function
size could be a few pixels long and the classifier confuses
SN with bogus samples of type cosmic rays. In regular
nights, asteroids and satellites are a key source of contamination, and then a small fraction of image subtraction issues. Alerts triggered near known variable stars
or asteroids and classified as SNe by the SN Hunter are
removed from the list of 100 candidates to be visually
inspected by astronomers.
5.2. Reported and Confirmed Supernovae
From June 26th 2019 to February 28th 2021, we have
reported 6846 new SN candidates to TNS, increasing
this number by 11.8 SNe per day on average, of which
995 have been observed spectroscopically. Table 4 shows
the number of candidates for each confirmed class, of
which 971 were confirmed as SNe. Non-SNe objects reported were 5 TDEs, 5 galaxies, 4 Nova, 2 Other, 2 cataclysmic variables (CV), 2 AGNs, 2 unknowns, 1 variable star, 1 M dwarf. Even though TDEs are not SNe,
follow-up of these events is still of significant interest,
due to their relative scarcity (van Velzen et al. 2020). In
summary, taking into consideration the conservative final candidate selection done by the team of astronomers
to perform spectroscopic confirmation, our reported and
confirmed candidates have around 2% contamination by
non-SNe objects.
In Figure 14, we show the cumulative distribution of
candidates reported to TNS from June 26th 2019 to
February 28th 2021. The cumulative distribution is separated into two parts, namely the alerts with more than
one detection to date (orange) and the alerts with a single detection to date (blue). We can consider the percentage of candidates with more than one detection to
be a lower bound of real non-moving astronomical objects, since we do not have the true label for reported
alerts; we define this as “purity”, since multiple associated detections are a clear sign of a real non-moving
astronomical object rather than a moving object or bogus alert. Candidates with only single detections to date
could be due to several reasons: moving objects, bogus
alerts, relatively short transients that were only above
the detection threshold for a short period of time, and
=== PAGE 17 ===
ALeRCE Stamp Classifier
17
Figure 13. Candidate visualization in the Supernova Hunter tool. On the left side, the SN candidate ID is shown as a clickable
link to the ALeRCE frontend, with relevant metadata such as ra, dec, magnitude, date, etc. At the bottom there are links to
other sources of information, including ALeRCE, NED, TNS, and the Simbad Astronomical Database. In the middle of the
figure there is a colored image from Aladin. On the right side, the stamps of the first detection are shown, along with buttons
for reporting the candidate as eventual bogus or as a possible SN.
Cumulative number of reported SNe
objects that are in locations which have not been visited
again by the public ZTF Survey since the object detection. We have been increasing the purity approximately
linearly, from ≈60% to ≈82% (reported candidates detected with multiple alerts to date).
7000
6000
60% to 82% of the total cumulative
1 alert
>1 alerts
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
58700
58800
58900
59000
59100
Detection time [MJD]
59200
Figure 14. Cumulative number of reported SNe since we
started reporting on June 26th 2019 February 28th 2021.
The average rate of reporting is 11.8 candidates per day.
Currently ≈82% of our reported candidates are detected with
multiple alerts (purity), implied they are true SNe, while
≈12% have only one detection and thus less certainty. We
have been increasing the purity of the reported candidates
roughly linearly from ≈60% to ≈82%.
For comparison purposes, we gathered the objects
reported by both ALeRCE and AMPEL (Alert Management, Photometry and Evaluation of Lightcurves,
which is an internal ZTF classification effort; Nordin
et al. 2019) to TNS, and compared the reporting times
within 3 days after the first detection. Figure 15 shows
the cumulative histogram of reporting times to TNS for
ALeRCE and AMPEL, along with the cases where reports were done by ALeRCE before having the second
detection in the public stream (one detection). Approximately 42% of the candidates reported by ALeRCE were
based on a single detection. An important difference between both systems is the visual inspection by experts
in the reporting process to TNS. According to Nordin
et al. (2019), AMPEL reports candidates automatically
using their “TNS channel”, which produces more reported candidates than our system, within 12 hours after the first detection. As described in this work, our
system’s final stage so far relies on human inspection,
checking and reporting, which occurs within 10 to 24
hours after the first detection, without reporting transients already reported by AMPEL (only two cases were
reported after AMPEL). Therefore, we report new candidates to TNS within a day after the first detection.
Besides, since ALeRCE is largely reporting candidates
with a single detection, 70% (4825) of the reports were
sent within one day after the first detection, compared
to 25% (1925) from AMPEL.
Figure 16 shows the distribution of time between first
or second detection and last non-detection for candidates reported by ALeRCE. Based on the data shown
in Figure 16, the average time between the last nondetection and the first detection is 4.2 days, and 8.1 days
for the second detection. Reporting candidates only after the second detection would result in a delay of 3.9
days on average, which represents a potentially critical
timespan to measure the spectra at early stages of the
transient event, as required in order to achieve the science goals described in Section 1. As mentioned before,
ALeRCE currently does not report candidates that were
previously reported by other groups using data from
=== PAGE 18 ===
18
R. Carrasco-Davis and E. Reyes
Spectroscopically observed candidates
SN Ia
SN II
SN Ic
SN Ia-91T-like
SN IIn
SN IIP
SN Ib
SN IIb
SN Ic-BL
TDE
Galaxy
Nova
SN Ia-pec
SN Iax[02cx-like]
SN I
SN Ia-91bg-like
SN
SN Ib/c
SLSN-II
Other
CV
unknown
AGN
SN Ib-pec
Varstar
SN Ibn
M dwarf
SLSN-I
SN Icn
676
148
24
22
21
16
14
13
10
5
5
4
4
4
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
ZTF, therefore our candidates reported using a single
detection increase the bulk of objects available for early
follow-up of transients that were not found by other
groups. We will report already reported candidates in
the near future, since this adds the additional information that the candidates passed our visual inspection
test. In addition, the work presented is a starting point
towards our goal of developing an automatic reporting
systems of the most highly confident subset of SN candidates.
6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Number of reported candidates
Confirmed class
6000
ALeRCE
AMPEL
ALeRCE one detection
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Time between first detection and report [days]
3.0
Figure 15. Cumulative distribution of time between the
first detection and the reporting time from TNS, for candidates reported by ALeRCE and AMPEL. The full distributions are shown with solid lines, and the distributions of reporting time for candidates with a single detection are shown
with segmented lines.
Normalized number of candidates
Table 4. Spectroscopically observed candidates discovered
by ALeRCE, with a total of 971 SNe, 24 non-SN objects (5
TDE, 5 galaxies, 4 Nova, 2 Other, 2 cataclysmic variables
(CV), 2 AGNs, 2 unknowns, 1 variable star, 1 M dwarf).
0.30
1st detection
2nd detection
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Time between detection and last non-detection [days]
Figure 16. Histogram of time between first (second) detection and the last non-detection of the ALeRCE reported
candidates.
As part of the ALeRCE Broker processing pipeline,
we identified characteristics of the images and metadata
within the ZTF alert stream that allow us to discriminate among SN, AGN, VS, asteroids and bogus alerts
using the first detection only. In order to solve this classification problem automatically and quickly identify the
best SN candidates to perform follow-up, we trained a
CNN. The inputs to this classifier are the science, reference and difference images, and part of the metadata
of the first detection alert. In addition, our CNN architecture is invariant to rotations within the stamps,
and was trained using an entropy regularized loss func-
=== PAGE 19 ===
ALeRCE Stamp Classifier
tion. The latter is useful to improve human readability
in predicted probabilities per class, in terms of certainty
assigned to each sample, so an expert can gain better
insights into the actual nature of the transients when
inspecting SN candidates.
Among all five classes that our CNN can classify, it
achieves an accuracy of 0.941 ± 0.004 on a balanced test
set, while in the SN class reaches a true positive rate
and a false positive rate of 87 ± 1% and 5 ± 2%, respectively. By manually inspecting the classification of each
sample, we found that the incorrectly classified objects
are in concordance with our hypotheses regarding separability of classes using only the first detection images.
Moreover, the CNN model successfully classify the alerts
in the labeled set by using the images only, but when applied to unlabeled data we found some flaws by inspecting the spatial distribution of each predicted class, for
instance, a concentration of extragalactic sources within
the Galactic plane, and a higher density of asteroids far
from the ecliptic. By giving the alert metadata as additional features to the classifier, we find that the spatial
distributions of the events are in agreement with the expectations, according to their tentative nature. More
specifically, extragalactic classes (SNe and AGNs) are
found outside the Galactic plane, VS have a higher density of predicted objects within the Galactic plane, and
asteroids are found around the ecliptic.
The proposed CNN classifier is deployed and its predictions are publicly available in an especially designed
visualization tool for inspection of candidates with high
SN class probability, called the SN Hunter (https://
snhunter.alerce.online/). The predictions are also available in the ALeRCE main frontend. This tool shows
relevant information about the SN candidates in order
to facilitate their analysis, and we used it to report SN
candidates on TNS for follow-up. We also presented a
visual inspection methodology that relies on the information presented in the Supernova Hunter tool, such
as the probability assigned by our classifier to the SN
class, alert metadata, position in the sky with respect
to the Galactic plane and the ecliptic, number of detections, etc. By manually inspecting candidates using
the SN Hunter tool, from June 26th 2019 to February
28th 2021, our team has reported 6846 candidates for
follow-up, out of which 995 were tested, and 971 were
spectroscopically confirmed as SN. Besides, the interface
allows experts to manually label bogus and SN candidates alike, which helps improve our training set.
As many as 70% of the candidates reported to TNS
by ALeRCE were reported within one day after the first
detection, and 42% of all the candidates reported by
ALeRCE were done by using a single detection, where
19
82% of the total alerts reported by ALeRCE have multiple detections to the date of writing this document,
confirming extragalactic nature. Since ALeRCE does
not report objects that had been previously reported,
these results correspond to the transients that were not
detected or chosen by other groups, therefore adding
new early transient reports to TNS.
We are currently working on improving the training
set by adding more examples from confirmed SNe, and
manually adding bogus candidates to the training set.
We run simple but insightful experiments to understand
the contribution of each image (science, reference, bogus) and features (metadata) to the classification task.
Furthermore, we are exploring ideas for model interpretability, adding visualization tools that may help understand why the model predicts a given class for a given
event. We are working on using LRP (Bach et al. 2015;
Montavon et al. 2019) and occlusion techniques (Zeiler
& Fergus 2014) to show what part of the input influences the decision in a specific way, so the expert can
use it to choose better candidates.
Regarding the performance of the model, an additional step would be to extend the system to be able
to process more than a single alert while keeping the capability of performing well with only one alert. New
approaches about how to achieve this have been explored in Carrasco-Davis et al. (2019) and Gómez et al.
(2020), feeding a neural network sequentially with the
data available so far, and improving the prediction every
time a new measurement arrives. In the near future our
efforts regarding alert classification, and particularly the
SN detection problem, will aim towards the automatization of the entire process of classification of the data
stream and reporting objects for follow-up, eliminating
or bringing expert assistance to a minimum.
The methodology proposed in this work is suitable
to other streams of data based on alerts, such as ATLAS (The Asteroid Terrestrial-impact Last Alert System; Tonry et al. 2018) and the Vera C. Rubin Observatory Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST; Ivezić
et al. 2019). The latter presents a further challenge
in terms of the amount of data generated, restrictions
in processing time due to the data generation rate, the
larger number of filters, the lack of comparison catalogs
at the survey’s depth, the smaller field of view per stamp
(currently planned to be only 6”×6”) and limited contextual information, and the possibility that either the
science or reference image may not be contained in the
alerts. We think our work on ZTF data will be a valuable precursor for the next generation of large etendue
telescopes.
=== PAGE 20 ===
20
R. Carrasco-Davis and E. Reyes
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge support from the National
Agency of Research and Development’s Millennium
Science Initiative through grant IC12009, awarded to
the Millennium Institute of Astrophysics (RC, ER,
CV, FF, PE, GP, FEB, IR, PSS, GC, SE, Ja, EC,
DR, DRM, MC) and from the National Agency for
Research and Development (ANID) grants: BASAL
Center of Mathematical Modelling AFB-170001 (CV,
FF, IR, ECN, CS, ECI) and Centro de Astrofı́sica
y Tecnologı́as Afines AFB-170002 (FEB, PSS, MC);
FONDECYT Regular #1171678 (PE), #1200710 (FF),
#1190818(FEB), #1200495 (FEB), #1171273 (MC),
#1201793(GP); FONDECYT Postdoctorado #3200250
(PSS); Magı́ster Nacional 2019 #22190947 (ER). This
work was funded in part by project CORFO 10CEII9157 Inria Chile (PS).
Software: Aladin (Bonnarel et al. 2000), Apache
ECharts9 , Apache Kafka10 , Apache Spark (Zaharia et al.
2016), ASTROIDE (Brahem et al. 2018), Astropy (Astropy Collaboration et al. 2013), catsHTM (Soumagnac
& Ofek 2018), Dask (Rocklin 2015), Jupyter 11 , Keras
(Chollet & others 2018), Matplotlib (Hunter 2007),
NED (Steer et al. 2016), Pandas (McKinney 2010),
Prometheus12 , Python13 , scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al.
2011), Simbad-CDS (Wenger et al. 2000), Tensorflow
(Martı́n Abadi et al. 2015), Vue14 , Vuetify15 , PostgreSQL16 .
APPENDIX
A. EXPLORING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FEATURES AND CLASSES
Table A1. Clipping values for each feature. “max” or “min” in the clipping range for each feature means that the maximum
and minimum value is preserved for that feature respectively.
Feature
[min value, max value]
sgscore1
distpsnr1
sgscore2
distpsnr2
sgscore3
distpsnr3
ifwhm
ndethist
ncovhist
chinr
sharpnr
non detections
[-1, max]
[-1, max]
[-1, max]
[-1, max]
[-1, max]
[-1, max]
[min, 10]
[min, 20]
[min, 3000]
[-1, 15]
[-1, 1.5]
[min, 2000]
B. CNN GLOSSARY AND TRAINING
B.1. CNN architecture
• Fully connected layer: Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are mathematical models that are mostly used for
classification or regression. ANNs make use of basic processing units called neurons, which receive vectors x of data
as input, then apply a linear function to them, followed by a non-linear activation function. These neurons are
9 https://echarts.apache.org
10 https://kafka.apache.org/
11 https://jupyter.org/
12 https://prometheus.io/
13 https://www.python.org/
14 https://vuejs.org/
15 https://vuetifyjs.com/
16 https://www.postgresql.org/
=== PAGE 21 ===
21
ALeRCE Stamp Classifier
30
20
10
0
8
6
4
2
0
10.0
AGN
SN
VS
asteroid
bogus
1.0
0.5
1.0
2
1
0.0
0.5
sgscore1
0.5
1.0
0.0
0.5
sgscore3
1.0
0
0
10
20
distpsnr1
30
0.00
12
14
16
18
magpsf
20
0.10
2.5
0.05
0.0
0.1
20
0.0
0
10
20
distpsnr3
30
10
0.25
5.0
40
20
0.50
0.15
0.2
1.00
0.75
7.5
0
0.00
30
0.05
0.10 0.15
sigmapsf
0.20
0
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
0.000
20
10
0.5
10
5
0.0
0
0
16
18
diffmaglim
20
0.02
50
0
ecl_lat
50
1.0
0.010
0.002
0.005
0.000
0.5
0.0
0.0
0.5
sgscore2
1.0
0
100
200
ecl_long
0
10
20
distpsnr2
30
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
isdiffpos
1.5
0.0
0
2
4
6
fwhm
25
0
25
50
dec
8
10
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
100
200
ra
0.00
300
75
0.0100
0.0075
0.0050
0.0025
5
0.000
300
0.00
1.0
10
15
ndethist
20
0.020
0.004
0.005
500 1000 1500 2000
non_detections
0.8
0.015
1.0
0
0.4 0.6
classtar
0.006
0.010
0.000
0.2
0.008
0.04
0.00
0.0
0.5
15
1.0
14
1.0
50
0
gal_lat
50
0.5 0.0 0.5
sharpnr
1.0
15
0.0000
0.0100
0.0075
0.0050
0.0025
0.0000
0
1000
2000
ncovhist
0
100
200
gal_long
3000
300
10
5
0
5
chinr
10
15
0
1.0
1.5
Figure A1. Feature distribution per class of the labeled dataset. Each feature was clipped to the values given in Table A1.
grouped in layers, which are called fully connected layers. The output produced by a set of neurons of a specific
fully connected layer is calculated as:
y = φ(Wx + b),
(B1)
where x ∈ Rn is the input of the layer, y ∈ Rm is the output of the layer, W ∈ Rm×n is a matrix of parameters
called weights, b ∈ Rm is a vector which contains the so-called biases of the layer, and φ(·) is a non-linear activation
function that follows the linear transformation of x. There are all sort of flavors of non-linear activation functions,
the most commonly used are:
=== PAGE 22 ===
22
R. Carrasco-Davis and E. Reyes
1
,
1 + e−x
ex − e−x
tanh(x) = x
,
e + e−x
ReLU(x) = max{0, x}.
sigmoid(x) =
(B2)
(B3)
(B4)
To be precise, W and b are referred to as the parameters of a fully connected layer, and they are modified during
training to be optimized for the task at hand. Fully connected layers can be sequentially stacked one after the other
to integrate an ANN model. For instance, an ANN of two layers, is defined as:
z = φ(W(1) x + b(1) ),
(B5)
(2)
(B6)
y = φ(W
(2)
z+b
).
The parameters of the ANN are θ = (W(1) , b(1) , W(2) , b(2) ). The way of grouping neurons and layers in an ANN is
called the architecture of an ANN.
• Softmax output layer: A commonly used activation function at the output of ANN models is the sigmoid(x),
whose output is bounded by (0, 1), and can be interpreted as the probability of activation of a neuron, a property
useful for binary classification. A generalization of the aforementioned function, useful for multi-class classification
models, is the softmax activation function, usually referred to as softmax output layer, where there are K neurons
xi , i ∈ {1, . . . , K}, and it is desired to assign a probability to each one, hence, requiring that they add up to one.
This is done by the softmax activation function, defined as:
exi
softmax(xi ) = PK
j=1 e
xj
,
i ∈ {1, . . . , K}.
(B7)
• Convolutional layer: ANN with fully connected layers are limited to vector-like inputs, and they do not take into
account the presence of correlation between adjacent features. To overcome this limitation, and preserve a degree
of spatial or temporal correlation in the input of models, CNNs were proposed. The main component of CNNs are
convolution layers, which apply a filter or kernel to the input of the layer by a convolution operation. Similar to a
fully connected layer, convolutional layer outputs are calculated as follow:
y = φ(W ∗ x + b),
(B8)
where x stands for the input of the layer, y is the output of the layer, W is a set of filters to apply by convolution
to the input, b is the vector of biases for each filter, and φ(·) is the activation function. In this case the ∗ operation
between x and W is a convolution. The model used in this work applies convolutions to images, so x ∈ Re×f ×g and
y ∈ Ru×v×l are 3d tensors, while W ∈ Rd×d×t×l and b ∈ Rl . The calculation of every element yi,j,k of y is derived
from the operation of the convolutional layer as follows:
yi,j,k =
X
xi−m,j−n,p Wm,n,p,k + bk ,
(B9)
m,n,p
where every element i, j, k of the tensor y is calculated by moving the filters of W over the tensor x and applying
eq. B9. Each time W moves over the first two dimensions of x, it skips S pixels, where S is called stride. After
applying the convolutional layer, the first two dimensions of y are smaller in size than the ones of x. The spatial
dimensions (first and second dimension) of the tensors x and y relate to each other as follows:
E−D
+ 1,
(B10)
S
where U is the size of any of the spatial dimensions of y, E is the size of the respective spatial dimension of x, D is
the respective spatial dimension of W and S is the stride used in the convolution operation.
U=
=== PAGE 23 ===
ALeRCE Stamp Classifier
23
• Zero-padding: It is a commonly used technique to preserve the spatial dimensions of the input x ∈ Re×f ×g at the
output y ∈ Ru×v×l of a convolutional layer. Zero-padding consists on adding 0’s to the edges of the spatial dimensions
of x. For a convolutional layer of stride S = 1, and kernel size D, the zero-padded input to the convolutional layer
must have dimensions such as x ∈ R(e+bD/2c)×(f +bD/2c)×g , where D/2 is the amount of zero-padding included to
achieve same spatial dimensions of e = u ∧ f = v, between the layer’s input x and output y.
• Max pooling: Pooling layers are used in CNNs to reduce the spatial dimensionality of their inputs. The max
pooling used in the model shown in Fig. 3 returns the maximum value within a window of its input x, in the same
way as a convolutional filter, this maximum value extraction window is rolled across the spatial dimensions of the
input. In the case of the architecture shown in Fig. 3, the pooling window is of dimension 2×2 with a stride of 2,
i.e., without overlapping of the window, yielding a spatial dimensionality reduction by half each time max pooling
is applied.
• Batch normalization layer: It works as a trainable normalization layer that has different behavior during training
and evaluation of the model. During training, batch normalization layer calculates the mean and variance of each
feature, to normalize them and compute an exponential moving average of mean and variance of the training set.
After training the model, for its evaluation, the whole population statistics adjusted during training are used to
normalize evaluation inputs. Batch normalization not only normalizes input values to have a mean value near 0 or
a variance value near 1, it also contains a linear ponderation of these inputs, that allows their scaling and shifting.
This layer allows the model to emphasize or ignore specific inputs, acting as a regularizer and speeding up training.
• Dropout: It is an operation that is usually applied at the output of fully connected layers, and it is used as a
regularizer of the model to avoid overfitting of layers with large number of neurons. Similar to a batch normalization
layer, dropout performs different operations during training and evaluation. The dropout operation is defined by the
dropout rate DR ∈ [0, 1], which is a parameter that, at the training phase of the model, defines the probability
of setting each of its inputs to 0, and multiplying the values not set to 0 by 1/(1 − DR), such that the sum over all
the input values remains the same. At each training step a percentage DR of the outputs of a fully connected layer
won’t be used, reducing the effective size of that layer. On the other hand, when using the model after training,
dropout is deactivated. The desired effect of dropout is to enforce the model to not depend on specific units of every
layer.
The model described in Fig. 3, is based on Enhanced Deep-HiTS Reyes et al. (2018), a state of the art classifier for
binary classification of real astronomical object and bogus samples. The architecture of this model introduced total
rotational invariance, which empirically proved to enhance performance on the classification of astronomical images.
B.2. Neural network training
• Procedure to train a neural network: The objective of using a neural network fθ of parameters θ ∈ Θ, is to
approximate a function y = f (x), with x ∈ X . In practice there is no access to the whole data distribution X , but
to a subset of N data samples of the function to approximate {(x(i) , y (i) )}N
i=1 , called training set. Finding the best
parameters θ∗ for the neural network fθ (x) requires solving the optimization problem:
N
1 X
L(y (i) , fθ (x(i) )),
θ∈Θ N
i=1
θ∗ = arg min C(θ) = arg min
θ∈Θ
(B11)
where C is an error functional defined by the function L that is called loss function. The optimization depicted
in eq. B11, is achieved by the training of the model through optimization techniques based on gradient descent,
when L is chosen as a differentiable function (e.g. cross-entropy). The parameters θ are iteratively adjusted by the
following rule, until convergence:
θk = θk−1 − µ∇θ C(θ).
(B12)
Because neural networks are composed of many consecutive layers, the direct calculation of ∇θ C(θ) is computationally
expensive. However, they can be calculated efficiently by back-propagation, which is an algorithm that propagates
the error from the output of the model until it reaches the first layer of the neural network, back-propagation is
based on the differentiation chain rule.
=== PAGE 24 ===
24
R. Carrasco-Davis and E. Reyes
Even when using back-propagation, for neural networks trained on large amounts of data, the calculation of the
exact gradient ∇θ C(θ) becomes computationally expensive. As a solution to this problem, a non biased estimation
˜ is used, where the gradient is calculated over a small random fraction of data, this is called a
of the gradient ∇θ C(θ)
batch and the amount of data samples in the batch is the batch size. Therefore, the optimization rule for a batch
B ⊂ X is:
1 X
θk = θk−1 − µ
∇θ L(y (i) , fθ (x(i) )),
(B13)
|B|
i∈B
where µ is a constant called learning rate, and establishes how large is the performed training step. This technique
of training by batches, is a form
gradient descent, and it guarantees convergence when µ is a well defined
P of stochastic P
sequence in k that satisfies k µk = ∞ and k µ2k < ∞.
• Adam optimizer: An alternative to the optimization rule of eq. B13, is Adam Kingma & Ba (2017), which is an
adaptive learning rate optimization algorithm that automatically adjust µk . It uses the squared gradients to scale
the learning rate and it includes the moving average of the gradients in its formulation, strategy that is known as
momentum, and its used to avoid converge to a local minima in the optimization. The main hyperparameters of
Adam are β1 and β2 , which relate to the moving averages of the gradients and the squared gradients, respectively,
and they regulate the rate at which the learning rate µk is adjusted.
C. HYPERPARAMETER RANDOM SEARCH RESULTS
For the hyperparameter random search, 133 different combinations of hyperparameters values were sampled from
Table 3, we trained 5 models for each hyperparameter set and then evaluated the test and validation set with every
model. In addition, for each model the inference time over a single sample was measured. The training procedure took
≈3 days of continuous training on 5 NVIDIA GTX 1080Ti GPUs. From now on, every time we refer to accuracy or
inference time of a model, they are the average measurement of 5 models trained with the same hyperparameters.
The selection of the best model from the hyperparameter random search was done by looking at the performance in
the validation set. We took the 5 models with highest validation accuracy and performed a Welch’s hypothesis test
between the model with highest and lowest validation accuracy among the top-5 models, obtaining a p-value of 0.594,
which means that the accuracy differences among the models are not statistically significant. Another important factor
when processing the volume of data encountered in astronomy, is the inference time of the used models, we measure
inference time for the top-5 models and a Welch’s hypothesis test between the fastest and the slowest model got a
p-value of 0.330, i.e. no statistically meaningful difference. Finally, the best model among the top-5 is chosen as the
one with β = 0.5, because it shows the most interpretable range of prediction probabilities, according to our team of
astronomers. The model chosen as the best has a validation accuracy of 0.950±0.003, test accuracy of 0.941±0.004
and inference time of 20.5±2.6 [ms]. The performance of the top-5 models over the test set is shown both in Figure A2
and Table A2. Every time we refer to the top-5 models we mean the aforementioned models.
Figure A2 shows plots of test accuracy versus the inference time, Figure A2a shows the results of all the 133 models
from the random hyperparameter search: In Figure A2a, the nearest to the top left corner, the better the model, the
diamond shapes in this figure correspond to the models with top-5 validation accuracy. Figure A2b shows in detail
the performance of these top-5, where each model has its one standard deviation error bars. These models are named
Mi , where i corresponds to the position of its validation accuracy w.r.t. to all the 133 models, the lower its validation
accuracy, the higher is i. Table A2 shows validation, test accuracy and inference time for the models with top-5
validation accuracy of Figure A2b, where M1 is selected as the best model, which is used for experiments shown in
previous sections. In Table A2, metrics of the best model M1 are underlined, whereas bold metrics correspond to the
highest of their respective column. Coincidentally, model M1 chosen as the best, has the higher test accuracy among
the top-5 models, and when compared to the model M2 with worst test accuracy, the Welch’s hypothesis test p-value
is 0.364, meaning that the difference is not statically meaningful.
Figure A2b shows that test accuracy and inference time error bars of each of the top-5 models contain each other.
D. ADDITIONAL RESULTS
=== PAGE 25 ===
25
ALeRCE Stamp Classifier
0.945
0.940
0.942
0.935
0.930
Test accuracy
Test accuracy
M0: ( : 0.0, BS: 32, LR: 1e-03,
DR: 0.2, IS: 21, KS: 7)
M1: ( : 0.5, BS: 64, LR: 1e-03,
DR: 0.5, IS: 21, KS: 5)
M2: ( : 1.0, BS: 32, LR: 1e-03,
DR: 0.5, IS: 21, KS: 7)
M3: ( : 1.0, BS: 32, LR: 5e-04,
DR: 0.2, IS: 21, KS: 3)
M4: ( : 0.8, BS: 32, LR: 1e-03,
DR: 0.8, IS: 21, KS: 3)
0.944
0.925
0.920
0.915
0.940
0.938
0.936
0.934
0.910
0.932
0.905
20
22
24
Inference time [ms]
26
18
20
22
24
26
Inference time [ms]
(a).
(b)
Figure A2. Accuracy of 133 models from hyperparameter random search. For each model, results consider 5 trainings and
respective evaluations on the test set. (a) Test accuracy versus inference time, where each dot is a model with different
hyperparameters, the closer to the left top corner is a model, the better its performance. Models represented with diamonds
correspond to the 5 models with best validation accuracy. (b) Test accuracy versus inference time for the models represented
as diamond in (a), each model has its error bars corresponding to one standard deviation and every model is denoted as Mi ,
where i corresponds to the ranking of its validation accuracy performance among all the 133 models of (a).
Table A2. Top-5 models with highest validation accuracy from the hyperparameter random search, ranked from M0 to M4 .
There are no statistical difference between the accuracy and inference time of the displayed models. M1 is chosen as the best
model because it has β = 0.5, which shows the most interpretable range of prediction probabilities, according to astronomers.
Metrics of the best model M1 are underlined, whereas bold metrics are the best of their respective column.
Model Name
Model’s Hyperparameters
M0
M1
M2
M3
M4
β: 0, BS: 32, LR: 1e-03, DR: 0.2, IS: 21, KS: 7
β: 0.5, BS: 64, LR: 1e-03, DR: 0.5, IS: 21, KS: 5
β: 1.0, BS: 32, LR: 1e-03, DR: 0.5, IS: 21, KS: 7
β: 1.0, BS: 32, LR: 5e-04, DR: 0.2, IS: 21, KS: 3
β: 0.8, BS: 32, LR: 1e-03, DR: 0.8, IS: 21, KS: 3
Validation Accuracy Test Accuracy Inference Time [ms]
0.950±0.003
0.950±0.005
0.949±0.002
0.948±0.003
0.949±0.003
0.940±0.004
0.941±0.004
0.938±0.006
0.938±0.006
0.938±0.006
21.8±4.0
20.9±2.6
20.6±0.7
19.9±0.4
19.6±0.2
0.594
0.364
0.330
Welch’s t-test p-value M0 v/s M4 — M1 v/s M4 — M0 v/s M4
Table A3. Classes assigned to the unlabeled set described in Section 4, by the light curve classifier classifier (LC) from SánchezSáez et al. 2021 and the stamp classifier (SC). The stamp classifier finds 78% of the SN classified by the light curve classifier,
85% for AGNs and 96% for VS. The false positive in the SN class are 9% of AGNs, 6% of VS, 4% of asteroids and 3% of bogus.
The false positives of AGNs are 4% of SN and 1% of VS, and false positives of VS is only 3% with AGNs
LC
SNIa
SNIbc
SNII
SLSN
AGN
Blazar
QSO
CV/Nova
YSO
DSCT
RRL
Ceph
LPV
EB
Periodic-Other
SN
AGN
VS
Asteroid
Bogus
355
5
10
19
7
124
2
7
8
1
246
27
22
6
9
257
83
38
17
19
657
4057
393
1
47
87
1310
623
4
16
13
9553
691
1
13
241
592
2545
38
84
76
309
5023
10
36
1
227
5098
0
1
22
1586
29635
7
8
4
67
9657
1
4
58
61
36478
107
23
7
1133
56587
8
14
18
1738
16539
1
22
Recall
90%
87%
79%
62%
79%
64%
93%
73%
92%
96%
95%
99%
99%
98%
90%
SC
=== PAGE 26 ===
26
R. Carrasco-Davis and E. Reyes
Test set
AGN 0.91±0.02 0.02±0.01 0.06±0.01
0
0.02±0.01
True label
SN 0.03±0.01 0.8±0.02 0.01±0.01 0.14±0.01 0.02±0.01
VS 0.14±0.02
0
0.85±0.02
0
0
asteroid
0
0.04±0.02 0.01±0.0 0.95±0.02
bogus
0
0.04±0.01 0.01±0.0 0.04±0.02 0.91±0.02
AGN
SN
VS
asteroid
Predicted label
0
bogus
Figure A3. Confusion matrix for the test set when using the stamp classifier only on the three images, without alert metadata
features.
Figure A4. Space distribution for the unlabeled data, and distribution of predictions per class using the stamp classifier only
on the three images, without alert metadata features. The ecliptic is shown with a yellow line with black edges. Extragalactic
classes (SNe and AGNs) still show a lower density at low galactic latitudes, but are found with higher density, compared to the
predictions of the stamp classifier with features, shown in Figure 8. Also, the predicted asteroids by the classifier without using
alert metadata features have higher density far from the ecliptic compared to the classifier that uses features.
=== PAGE 27 ===
ALeRCE Stamp Classifier
27
E. BOGUS ANALYSIS
We elaborated an analysis of both the bogus samples from ZTF’s alert stream and the ones present in our training
set.
With our model we estimate the proportion of bogus present in ZTF’s alert stream, proportion that is unfeasible to
accurately calculate via direct visualization, due to the large number of alerts generated each night. We run through
the stamp classifier 176,376 alerts chosen at random from ZTF’s alert stream on 10 nights, each of these nights are
also chosen at random between 08-18-2020 and 03-03-2021. Our model classifies 34,438 alerts as bogus (∼20% of the
alerts).
As the stamp classifier used by the SN Hunter only processes first detection alerts, to estimate the amount of bogus
alerts processed in a night, from the previous 176,376 alerts we only take the 51,481 alerts that have 1 detection. Our
model identifies 31,001 samples as bogus (∼60% of the total 51,481 alerts with 1 detection).
Based on the manual observations of alerts classified as bogus by our experts, we were able to identify 9 different
types of bogus that most commonly appear in ZTF’s stream:
• Region near saturated star: Bright sources systematically found around very bright targets. When stars
are too bright, they can saturate the camera of the telescope and produce artifacts that appear as light flux
variations and trigger alerts.
• Bad difference: Produced by a misalignment of the bright source in the template and science images, which
translates into artifacts in the difference image. They appear in the images as dark/light dipoles around every
source in the field.
• Near bad difference: A bad difference can produce artifacts that affect wide portions of an image and trigger
alerts far away from the misaligned source.
• Ghost: Residuals from saturated observations, they usually look like large extended circles with diffraction
spikes.
• Extended dark region: Extended dark regions in the science image.
• Satellite: We consider alerts triggered by passing human-made satellites as bogus. They trigger alerts that
often show multiple point-like or extended sources on the same image in a line (due to rotation and reflection of
the satellite), and appear convolved with the PSF.
• Bad pixel columns: Science images captured by regions of the telescope’s camera where whole columns of
pixels go bad. They look like a clear change in background (up or down) over a small portion of columns in the
field of the images.
• Bad pixel: Science images captured by regions of the telescope’s camera where a single pixel is bad.
• Cosmic ray: High energy particles that interact with a few pixels of the telescope’s camera, they generate
alerts that look smaller than or have shapes which are distinctly different from a point source or moving source
convolved with PSF.
We elaborated a recognition of the previous types of bogus present in our training set. A subset of 1000 bogus
samples randomly taken from the training set was analyzed by an astronomer, were all the 9 different types of bogus
described above were identified. A distribution of the 1000 identified bogus can be seen in Figure A5. Although
we didn’t characterize types of bogus for all the bogus in the training set (because of time restrictions involved in
manually analyzing ∼10000 bogus events), as the 1000 bogus samples from Figure A5 were randomly sampled, it is
an approximation of the true distribution of bogus types in the whole training set.
Figure A5 shows that the most common type of bogus in our training set are cosmic rays, this can be explained by
how most of the bogus samples were obtained; bogus missclassified as SN by the stamp classifier, and cosmic rays is the
most common type of bogus missclassified as SN. Figure A5 also shows that 10 samples were identified as non-bogus
(alerts triggered by a real astronomical source), which can be interpreted as the fact that our manual bogus labeling
process has an estimated error/contamination of 1% percent. One of the bogus analyzed doesn’t match any known
type, so it is assigned the unknown tag in Figure A5.
=== PAGE 28 ===
28
R. Carrasco-Davis and E. Reyes
Bogus type distribution
0.40
0.35
Density
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
y
Non-bogu
s
Cosmic ra
Bad pixel
col.
Bad pixel
reg.
Satellite
Ext. dark
diff.
Ghost
Near bad
star
Bad diff.
Near sat.
Unknown
0.00
Figure A5. Normalized distribution of different types of bogus present in 1,000 bogus samples from our training set. Bogus
types were visually analyzed by an astronomer.
The previous analysis was performed over bogus of our training set. We propose as future work to perform a similar
study over alerts from the ZTF’s stream which are classified as bogus by our stamp classifier. It is worth mentioning
that the distribution of types of bogus shown in Figure A5 is not representative of the actual distribution from ZTF’s
alert stream, since it is biased by our labeling process.
As bogus in the training set were manually labeled in 2 steps, we analyzed how the distribution of bogus vary from
one step to the other. Step 1 is composed of 1980 bogus examples reported by ZTF (based on human inspection).
Many bogus coming from step 1 are characterized for containing many NaN patches, being near saturated sources or
subtraction misalignments; bogus types that are easily identifiable by eye. These bogus were used to train an early
version of the stamp classifier and detect SNe. Step 2 bogus include 8783 samples and they are alerts that were
confused with a SN by the early version of the stamp classifier and astronomers visually confirmed as bogus. As
we increased the amount of labeled bogus, we iteratively improved the stamp classifier and kept visually identifying
bogus that were misclassified as SNe. Because of the way we obtained our bogus samples, we expect them not to be
representative or have the same distribution of all the bogus in ZTF’s alert stream. To avoid this type of biases, in the
future we plan to label by hand bogus alerts that are confused with the rest of the classes (VS, AGN and asteroids).
The effect of using bogus coming form these 2 steps can be seen in Figure A6, where we used U-MAP (McInnes et al.
2020) to project alert image triplets in a 2D space, alerts with similar images should appear as neighbor points in the
projection. Alongside each cluster of alerts we plotted images of bogus and SNe samples, to visualize how alike are
SNe and step 2 bogus alerts. Figure A6 shows 3 main clusters, 2 small cluster at the right and bottom of the U-MAP
projection, composed mainly by step 1 bogus, and a big cluster mainly composed of SNe alerts and step 2 bogus, with
a few step 1 bogus in it, the ones that most resemble SNe. The big cluster shows that SNe samples overlap with step
2 bogus, where the later fill spaces between and around SNe. The behavior of step 2 bogus w.r.t. SNe is no surprise
to us, given the way step 2 bogus were generated (from misclassified SNe by old versions of the stamp classifier) they
are expected to resemble or look like SNe.
By visual inspection of the clusters, we verified that close-by samples in the U-MAP projection do look alike and
have similar geometric structure. For the 3 main clusters of Figure A6, we analyzed the regions enclosed by dark
circles (labeled from 1 to 3 in the figure) and visualized the samples of SNe and bogus of step 1 and 2:
• Circle 1 encloses the small cluster at the left, which is dominated by samples with NaN patches or bright sources
at the left of the images. The displayed samples correspond to a near saturated star bogus with a NaN patch at
its left, for step 1 bogus. The step 2 bogus sample is also of type near saturated star with the bright source at
its left. The displayed SN sample has a bright source at the left of the template image (middle image).
=== PAGE 29 ===
29
ALeRCE Stamp Classifier
U-MAP projection
12.5
(x, y): (4.93, 0.10), bogus type: near bad diff.
10.0
Bogus step 1
bogus step 2
SN
bogus step 1
7.5
(x, y): (4.98, 0.15), bogus type: near bad diff.
Bogus step 2
y
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5
(x, y): (4.63, 0.38)
7.5
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
x
2.5
5.0
10.0
(x, y): (5.01, -4.92), bogus type: near saturated star
Bogus step 1
Bogus step 1
(x, y): (-5.99, 5.99), bogus type: near saturated star
7.5
SN
5.0
(x, y): (5.25, -4.96), bogus type: near saturated star
Bogus step 2
Bogus step 2
(x, y): (-5.36, 5.38), bogus type: near saturated star
(x, y): (5.17, -4.99)
SN
SN
(x, y): (-6.01, 5.98)
Figure A6. U-MAP projection of image triplets of bogus labeled in step 1 and step 2, alongside SNe alerts. Three main
clusters can be identified in the projection, for each of them, images of samples from each class are shown, their projection
coordinates are displayed to denote that they are close in the U-MAP projection space, and close by samples tend to look alike.
Bogus types for each sample are assigned by an astronomer. Each triplet shows images of science, reference and difference, in
that order. The analyzed regions are enclosed by circles labeled from 1 to 3.
• Circle 2 encloses a region of the biggest cluster. This region is the one with most step 1 bogus, and it is mainly
composed of samples with a bad difference at the left or top of the images. The displayed samples of type step
1 and step 2 bogus are near bad differences located at the left of the images, while the SN sample also has a bad
difference at its left.
• Circle 3 encloses the small cluster at the bottom of Figure A6, which is mainly composed of samples with NaN
patches or bright sources at the right of the images. The displayed step 1 and step 2 bogus samples correspond
to near saturated star bogus with NaN patch at their right, while the SN sample has a bright source and a NaN
patch at its right.
For all the regions analyzed, clusterization was dominated by geometric compositions within images, also bogus
clusters can be related to the different bogus types previously described, where bogus within a region tend to be of
the same type. In the future it would be useful to use a visualization technique invariant to geometric orientation of
samples, to avoid the case where clusters with bogus samples of the same type but different geometric orientation are
positioned far away in the projection.
We do not show all 5 classes together in the U-MAP projection because trying to project so many classes of highdimensional data in a 2D embedding is a problem that is too hard to solve for U-MAP and not enough insightful
clusters arise, only blobs of highly overlapped samples can be seen.
=== PAGE 30 ===
Average probability assigned
30
R. Carrasco-Davis and E. Reyes
0.9
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.6
AGN
SN
VS
asteroid
bogus
0.4
0.2
1.0
0.5
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.4
0.5
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.5
(a) sgscore1
1.0
0
5
10 15 20
(b) distpsnr1
25
30
1.0
0.9
0.9
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.9
0.4
0.85
0.80
0.75
0.70
0.65
0.60
0.55
0
5
10 15 20
(d) distpsnr2
25
30
1.0
0.0
0.5
(e) sgscore3
1.0
0.4 0.6
(g) isdiffpos
0.8
1.0
0.6
0.6
0.4
0
2
4
6
(h) fwhm
8
0.4
0.2
0.2
0.00
0.05
0.10 0.15
(j) sigmapsf
0.20
5
10 15 20
(f) distpsnr3
25
12
14
16
18
(i) magpsf
20
0
20 40
(l) dec
30
0.2
0.2
0.8
0
0.4
0.4
0.2
1.0
0.6
0.6
0.0
0.0
0.5
(c) sgscore2
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.0
0.5
0.5
0
100
200
(k) ra
300
10
0.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
20
60
80
Figure A7. Average model probabilities assigned to the correct class in the training set vs feature values. Each plot from (a)
to (l) contains the probabilities for a specific feature.
=== PAGE 31 ===
31
Average probability assigned
ALeRCE Stamp Classifier
0.8
0.6
AGN
SN
VS
asteroid
bogus
0.4
0.2
14
16
18
(a) diffmaglim
20
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.4 0.6
(b) classtar
0.8
1.0
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.6
0.4
0.4
500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000
(d) ncovhist
5
10
15
(c) ndethist
20
0.2
0.2
0
0.5
50
25
0
25 50
(e) ecl_lat
75
0
100
200
(f) ecl_long
300
0.9
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.7
0.6
0.4
0.6
0.4
0.5
0.2
50
0
(g) gal_lat
50
0
100
200
(h) gal_long
0.2
300
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.2
0.2
0.2
0
5
(j) chinr
10
15
1.0
0.5
0.0 0.5
(k) sharpnr
1.0
1.5
0.0 0
0
500 1000 1500
(i) non_detections
50
100 150
(l) SNR
200
2000
250
Figure A8. Average model probabilities assigned to the correct class in the training set vs feature values. Each plot from (a)
to (l) contains the probabilities for a specific feature. Note that the SNR was not added as a feature to the classifier, this is
shown for explanatory purposes mentioned in Section 4.
=== PAGE 32 ===
32
R. Carrasco-Davis and E. Reyes
REFERENCES
Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J.,
et al. 2013, A&A, 558, A33,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201322068
Bach, S., Binder, A., Montavon, G., et al. 2015, PLoS
ONE, 10, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130140
Barchi, P. H., de Carvalho, R. R., Rosa, R. R., et al. 2020,
Astronomy and Computing, 30, 100334,
doi: 10.1016/j.ascom.2019.100334
Becker, I., Pichara, K., Catelan, M., et al. 2020, MNRAS,
493, 2981, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa350
Bellm, E. C., Kulkarni, S. R., Graham, M. J., et al. 2018,
Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific,
131, 018002, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aaecbe
Bertin, E., & Arnouts, S. 1996, Astronomy and
Astrophysics Supplement Series, 117, 393,
doi: 10.1051/aas:1996164
Boch, T., & Fernique, P. 2014, 485, 277.
http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014ASPC..485..277B
Bonnarel, F., Fernique, P., Bienaymé, O., et al. 2000,
Astronomy and Astrophysics Supplement Series, 143, 33,
doi: 10.1051/aas:2000331
Boone, K. 2019, The Astronomical Journal, 158, 257,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab5182
Brahem, M., Zeitouni, K., & Yeh, L. 2018, IEEE
Transactions on Big Data, 1,
doi: 10.1109/TBDATA.2018.2873749
Breiman, L. 2001, Machine Learning, 45, 5,
doi: 10.1023/A:1010933404324
Cabrera-Vives, G., Reyes, I., Förster, F., Estévez, P. A., &
Maureira, J.-C. 2017, The Astrophysical Journal, 836, 97,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/836/1/97
Carrasco-Davis, R., Cabrera-Vives, G., Förster, F., et al.
2019, Publications of the Astronomical Society of the
Pacific, 131, 108006, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aaef12
Chambers, K. C., Magnier, E. A., Metcalfe, N., et al. 2019,
arXiv:1612.05560 [astro-ph].
http://arxiv.org/abs/1612.05560
Chollet, F., & others. 2018, Astrophysics Source Code
Library, ascl:1806.022.
http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018ascl.soft06022C
Dieleman, S., De Fauw, J., & Kavukcuoglu, K. 2016,
arXiv:1602.02660 [cs]. http://arxiv.org/abs/1602.02660
Dieleman, S., Willett, K. W., & Dambre, J. 2015, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 450, 1441,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv632
Drake, A. J., Graham, M. J., Djorgovski, S. G., et al. 2014,
The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 213, 9,
doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/213/1/9
Drake, A. J., Djorgovski, S. G., Catelan, M., et al. 2017,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 469,
3688, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx1085
Duev, D. A., Mahabal, A., Masci, F. J., et al. 2019,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 489,
3582, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz2357
Flesch, E. W. 2015, Publications of the Astronomical
Society of Australia, 32, doi: 10.1017/pasa.2015.10
—. 2019, arXiv:1912.05614 [astro-ph].
http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.05614
Förster, F., Moriya, T. J., Maureira, J. C., et al. 2018,
Nature Astronomy, 2, 808,
doi: 10.1038/s41550-018-0563-4
Förster, F., Cabrera-Vives, G., Castillo-Navarrete, E., et al.
2021, The Astronomical Journal, 161, 242,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abe9bc
Gal-Yam, A., Arcavi, I., Ofek, E. O., et al. 2014, Nature,
509, 471, doi: 10.1038/nature13304
Goldstein, D. A., D’Andrea, C. B., Fischer, J. A., et al.
2015, The Astronomical Journal, 150, 82,
doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/150/3/82
Groh, J. H. 2014, A&A, 572, L11,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201424852
Gómez, C., Neira, M., Hoyos, M. H., Arbeláez, P., &
Forero-Romero, J. E. 2020, arXiv:2004.13877 [astro-ph].
http://arxiv.org/abs/2004.13877
Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing in Science Engineering, 9,
90, doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55
Ivezić, Ž., Kahn, S. M., Tyson, J. A., et al. 2019, The
Astrophysical Journal, 873, 111,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab042c
Jayasinghe, T., Kochanek, C. S., Stanek, K. Z., et al. 2018,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 477,
3145, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty838
Jayasinghe, T., Stanek, K. Z., Kochanek, C. S., et al.
2019a, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 486, 1907, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz844
—. 2019b, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 485, 961, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz444
—. 2020, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 491, 13, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz2711
Jiang, J.-A., Doi, M., Maeda, K., et al. 2017, Nature, 550,
80, doi: 10.1038/nature23908
Kasen, D. 2010, ApJ, 708, 1025,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/708/2/1025
Khazov, D., Yaron, O., Gal-Yam, A., et al. 2016, ApJ, 818,
3, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/818/1/3
Kingma, D. P., & Ba, J. 2017, arXiv:1412.6980 [cs].
http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980
=== PAGE 33 ===
ALeRCE Stamp Classifier
33
Mahabal, A., Sheth, K., Gieseke, F., et al. 2017, in 2017
IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence
(SSCI), 1–8, doi: 10.1109/SSCI.2017.8280984
Naul, B., Bloom, J. S., Pérez, F., & van der Walt, S. 2018,
Nature Astronomy, 2, 151,
doi: 10.1038/s41550-017-0321-z
Mahabal, A., Rebbapragada, U., Walters, R., et al. 2019,
Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific,
131, 038002, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aaf3fa
Noebauer, U. M., Kromer, M., Taubenberger, S., et al.
2017, MNRAS, 472, 2787, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx2093
Martı́n Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, et al. 2015,
TensorFlow: Large-Scale Machine Learning on
Heterogeneous Systems. https://www.tensorflow.org/
Martı́nez-Palomera, J., Förster, F., Protopapas, P., et al.
2018, The Astronomical Journal, 156, 186,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aadfd8
Masci, F. J., Laher, R. R., Rusholme, B., et al. 2018,
Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific,
131, 018003, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aae8ac
Massaro, E., Maselli, A., Leto, C., et al. 2015, Astrophysics
and Space Science, 357, 75,
doi: 10.1007/s10509-015-2254-2
McInnes, L., Healy, J., & Melville, J. 2020, UMAP:
Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection for
Dimension Reduction. https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.03426
McKinney, W. 2010, Proceedings of the 9th Python in
Science Conference, 56,
doi: 10.25080/Majora-92bf1922-00a
Montavon, G., Binder, A., Lapuschkin, S., Samek, W., &
Müller, K.-R. 2019, in Explainable AI: Interpreting,
Explaining and Visualizing Deep Learning, ed.
W. Samek, G. Montavon, A. Vedaldi, L. K. Hansen, &
K.-R. Müller, Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Cham:
Springer International Publishing), 193–209,
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-28954-6 10
Moriya, T., Tominaga, N., Blinnikov, S. I., Baklanov, P. V.,
& Sorokina, E. I. 2011, MNRAS, 415, 199,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.18689.x
Morozova, V., Piro, A. L., & Valenti, S. 2017, ApJ, 838, 28,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa6251
Mowlavi, N., Lecoeur-Taı̈bi, I., Lebzelter, T., et al. 2018,
Astronomy & Astrophysics, 618, A58,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201833366
Muthukrishna, D., Parkinson, D., & Tucker, B. E. 2019,
The Astrophysical Journal, 885, 85,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab48f4
Nair, V., & Hinton, G. E. 2010, in Proceedings of the 27th
International Conference on International Conference on
Machine Learning, ICML’10 (Haifa, Israel: Omnipress),
807–814
Narayan, G., Zaidi, T., Soraisam, M. D., et al. 2018, The
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 236, 9,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/aab781
Nordin, J., Brinnel, V., Santen, J. v., et al. 2019,
Astronomy & Astrophysics, 631, A147,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201935634
Nugent, P. E., Sullivan, M., Cenko, S. B., et al. 2011,
Nature, 480, 344, doi: 10.1038/nature10644
Oh, K., Yi, S. K., Schawinski, K., et al. 2015, The
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 219, 1,
doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/219/1/1
Palaversa, L., Ivezić, Ž., Eyer, L., et al. 2013, The
Astronomical Journal, 146, 101,
doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/146/4/101
Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., et al. 2011,
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12, 2825.
http://jmlr.org/papers/v12/pedregosa11a.html
Pereyra, G., Tucker, G., Chorowski, J., Kaiser, L., &
Hinton, G. 2017, arXiv:1701.06548 [cs].
http://arxiv.org/abs/1701.06548
Pichara, K., Protopapas, P., & León, D. 2016, The
Astrophysical Journal, 819, 18,
doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/819/1/18
Piro, A. L., & Morozova, V. S. 2016, ApJ, 826, 96,
doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/826/1/96
Piro, A. L., & Nakar, E. 2013, ApJ, 769, 67,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/769/1/67
Pérez-Carrasco, M., Cabrera-Vives, G., Martinez-Marin,
M., et al. 2019, Publications of the Astronomical Society
of the Pacific, 131, 108002,
doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aaeeb4
Reyes, E., Estévez, P. A., Reyes, I., et al. 2018, in 2018
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
(IJCNN), 1–8, doi: 10.1109/IJCNN.2018.8489627
Richards, J. W., Starr, D. L., Butler, N. R., et al. 2011,
The Astrophysical Journal, 733, 10,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/733/1/10
Rimoldini, L., Holl, B., Audard, M., et al. 2019, Astronomy
& Astrophysics, 625, A97,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201834616
Rocklin, M. 2015, Proceedings of the 14th Python in
Science Conference, 126,
doi: 10.25080/Majora-7b98e3ed-013
Sánchez-Sáez, P., Reyes, I., Valenzuela, C., et al. 2021, The
Astronomical Journal, 161, 141,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abd5c1
=== PAGE 34 ===
34
R. Carrasco-Davis and E. Reyes
Smith, K. W., Williams, R. D., Young, D. R., et al. 2019,
Research Notes of the AAS, 3, 26,
doi: 10.3847/2515-5172/ab020f
Soumagnac, M. T., & Ofek, E. O. 2018, Publications of the
Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 130, 075002,
doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aac410
Steer, I., Madore, B. F., Mazzarella, J. M., et al. 2016, The
Astronomical Journal, 153, 37,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/153/1/37
Stetson, P. B. 1987, Publications of the Astronomical
Society of the Pacific, 99, 191, doi: 10.1086/131977
Tanaka, M., Tominaga, N., Morokuma, T., et al. 2016, The
Astrophysical Journal, 819, 5,
doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/819/1/5
Tominaga, N., Morokuma, T., Blinnikov, S. I., et al. 2011,
ApJS, 193, 20, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/193/1/20
Tonry, J. L., Denneau, L., Heinze, A. N., et al. 2018,
Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific,
130, 064505, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aabadf
Turpin, D., Ganet, M., Antier, S., et al. 2020,
arXiv:2001.03424 [astro-ph].
http://arxiv.org/abs/2001.03424
van Velzen, S., Gezari, S., Hammerstein, E., et al. 2020,
arXiv:2001.01409 [astro-ph].
http://arxiv.org/abs/2001.01409
Wenger, M., Ochsenbein, F., Egret, D., et al. 2000,
Astronomy and Astrophysics Supplement Series, 143, 9,
doi: 10.1051/aas:2000332
Yaron, O., Perley, D. A., Gal-Yam, A., et al. 2017, Nature
Physics, 13, 510, doi: 10.1038/nphys4025
Zaharia, M., Xin, R. S., Wendell, P., et al. 2016,
Communications of the ACM, 59, 56,
doi: 10.1145/2934664
Zeiler, M. D., & Fergus, R. 2014, in Computer Vision –
ECCV 2014, ed. D. Fleet, T. Pajdla, B. Schiele, &
T. Tuytelaars, Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(Cham: Springer International Publishing), 818–833,
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-10590-1 53
=== PAGE 35 ===
