=== PAGE 1 ===
Draft version December 24, 2020
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 01/23/15
RESULTS OF THE PHOTOMETRIC LSST ASTRONOMICAL TIME-SERIES CLASSIFICATION CHALLENGE
(PLAsTiCC)
R. Hložek,1, 2 K. A. Ponder,3, 4, 5 A.I. Malz,6 M. Dai,7, 8 G. Narayan,9 E.E.O. Ishida,10 T. Allam Jr,11
A. Bahmanyar,2 R. Biswas,12 L. Galbany,13 S.W. Jha,8 D. O. Jones,14 R. Kessler,15 M. Lochner,16, 17, 18
A.A. Mahabal,19, 20 K.S. Mandel,21, 22 J.R. Martı́nez-Galarza,23 J.D. McEwen,11 D. Muthukrishna,21
H.V. Peiris,12, 24 C.M. Peters,2 and C.N. Setzer12
(LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration, LSST Transient and Variable Stars Collaboration)
1
arXiv:2012.12392v1 [astro-ph.IM] 22 Dec 2020
2
Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Toronto, 50 St. George St., Toronto, ON M5S 3H4, Canada
Dunlap Institute for Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Toronto, 50 St. George St., Toronto, ON M5S 3H4, Canada
3 Berkeley Center for Cosmological Physics, Campbell Hall 341, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
4 Physics Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
5 SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, 2575 Sand Hill Rd, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA
6 Ruhr University Bochum, German Centre of Cosmological Lensing, Universitaetsstraße 150, 44801 Bochum, Germany
7 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
8 Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey, 136 Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, NJ 08854 USA
9 Space Telescope Science Institute, 3700 San Martin Dr, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
10 Université Clermont Auvergne, CNRS/IN2P3, LPC, F-63000 Clermont-Ferrand, France
11 Mullard Space Science Laboratory, Department of Space and Climate
Physics, University College London, Holmbury Hill Rd, Dorking RH5 6NT, UK
12 The Oskar Klein Centre for Cosmoparticle Physics, Department of
Physics, Stockholm University, AlbaNova, Stockholm, SE-106 91, Sweden
13 Departamento de Fı́sica Teórica y del Cosmos, Universidad de Granada, E-18071 Granada, Spain
14 NASA Einstein Fellow, University of Santa Cruz, 1156 High St, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA
15 KICP, 5640 S Ellis Ave, Chicago, IL 60637
16 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of the Western Cape, Bellville, Cape Town, 7535, South Africa
17 South African Radio Astronomy Observatory (SARAO), 2 Fir Street, Observatory, Cape Town, 7925, South Africa
18 African Institute for Mathematical Sciences, 6 Melrose Road, Muizenberg, 7945, South Africa
19 Division of Physics, Mathematics, and Astronomy, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
20 Center for Data Driven Discovery, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
21 Institute of Astronomy and Kavli Institute for Cosmology, Madingley Road, Cambridge, CB3 0HA, UK
22 Statistical Laboratory, DPMMS, University of Cambridge, Wilberforce Road, Cambridge, CB3 0WB, UK
23 Center for Astrophysics — Harvard & Smithsonian, 60 Garden Street, Mail Stop 66 Cambridge, MA 02138
24 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University College London, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, UK
(Dated: December 24, 2020)
Draft version December 24, 2020
ABSTRACT
Next-generation surveys like the Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST) on the Vera C. Rubin
Observatory will generate orders of magnitude more discoveries of transients and variable stars than
previous surveys. To prepare for this data deluge, we developed the Photometric LSST Astronomical Time-series Classification Challenge (PLAsTiCC), a competition which aimed to catalyze the
development of robust classifiers under LSST-like conditions of a non-representative training set for a
large photometric test set of imbalanced classes. Over 1,000 teams participated in PLAsTiCC, which
was hosted in the Kaggle data science competition platform between Sep 28, 2018 and Dec 17, 2018,
ultimately identifying three winners in February 2019. Participants produced classifiers employing a
diverse set of machine learning techniques including hybrid combinations and ensemble averages of a
range of approaches, among them boosted decision trees, neural networks, and multi-layer perceptrons.
The strong performance of the top three classifiers on Type Ia supernovae and kilonovae represent a
major improvement over the current state-of-the-art within astronomy. This paper summarizes the
most promising methods and evaluates their results in detail, highlighting future directions both for
classifier development and simulation needs for a next generation PLAsTiCC data set.
1. INTRODUCTION
The Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST, LSST
Science Collaboration et al. 2009) of the Vera C. Rubin
Observatory will be a survey of the full sky observable
from its location in the deserts of northern Chile, with
a combination of survey area and depth that is unprecedented. LSST will make a complete map of the sky every few days. This repeated scanning of the sky will be
used to generate difference images formed by subtracting
that map from a reference template, leading to millions
of ‘alerts’ every night for objects (or detected sources)
changing flux. The repeated scanning will also build up
light curves (a time series of measured light observed in
various filters) for the transients and variable stars (Ivezić
et al. 2019), whose brightness changes with time.
This large and heterogeneous data set consisting of
signals from different types of astronomical objects will
need to be classified into different categories or types of
transients and variables from the photometric light curve
data. Only a small fraction of objects will be followed
up spectroscopically to confirm their types. The need
for accurate photometric classification of light curves is
therefore a longstanding goal in transient astrophysics.
Classification challenges have often been designed with a
focus on correctly identifying one class from a given data
set.
=== PAGE 2 ===
2
Previous community efforts to simulate future surveys
included the Supernova Photometric Classification Challenge (SNPCC, Kessler et al. 2010), which galvanized the
astronomy community to develop classification methods
for three classes of supernovae given a smaller spectroscopic training set. The SNPCC performance metric had
a strong emphasis on returning a sample that was both
pure (one which had a small number of False Positive
classifications) and complete (one which had a large fraction of True Positive classifications), and its performance
metric balanced those criteria. Classification challenges
must often balance competing goals, with the balance
between the two axes often depending on spectroscopic
resource efficiency and the brightness limit of any survey, known as the photometric depth. While individual
science groups have historically focused on their specific
science needs and generated individualized simulations,
any classification algorithm that will be run on real and
heterogeneous data from LSST will need to be robust to
that heterogeneity.
The motivations behind PLAsTiCC were somewhat
different than those of groups focused on one scientific question. Given the heterogeneous types of objects that we expect LSST will provide, and the range
of science questions we will want to answer with these
data, the PLAsTiCC team instead asked the question:
Can you classify a broad range of objects with a good
overall/average classification of each type, and identify
new objects that are not included in the training set?
The PLAsTiCC challenge was presented to the broader
public through the Kaggle1 platform, a popular site
for data challenges and machine learning competitions.
While the participants in PLAsTiCC submitted classification methods that were often a combination of different strategies, their metric performance was not tuned
to any given type and allowed for comparison of classifiers in cases of degeneracies between classes that had not
been explored before.
The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we
present a general PLAsTiCC overview including data
simulation, validation, metric and information about the
competition. Section 3 details the top three submissions
and more general aspects of the methods used in the top
classifiers. We study alternative methods of exploring
the performance of the classifiers in Section 4, and summarize the challenges presented by the data in Section 5.
We conclude with key insights from this challenge in Section 6.
2. OVERVIEW OF PLAsTiCC
2.1. Data simulation
The PLAsTiCC data were simulated to mimic three
years of an LSST-type survey (which is slated to run for
a decade) using the SuperNova ANAlysis package (SNANA
Kessler et al. 2009). In May 2017, an initial call was put
out to the astronomy community to develop models of
extragalactic transients, Galactic variables and novel astronomical transients. In response to the call, 18 different
models were generated according to estimated rates and
distributions on the sky. The models included
1 The PLAsTiCC challenge is found at the PLAsTiCC-2018
Kaggle page.
1. Extragalactic models – including exploding supernovae (SNe) which have large variations in peak
brightness, kilonova (KN) models which are the
electromagnetic output from two colliding neutron
stars, the emission from the tidal disruption events
(TDE) of stars due to the supermassive black hole
at the center of a galaxy, and emission from gas
falling onto the black hole creating an active galactic nucleus (AGN). The supernova models represent a wide variety of scenarios, from the explosion
of stars at the end of their lives (SNII, SNIbc),
exploding white dwarf progenitors (the SNIa models including SNIa, SNIa-91bg and SNIax) and the
super-luminous supernovae (SLSN).
2. Galactic models – which include variable stars
and recurring transients such as Mira variables,
RR Lyrae and eclipsing binaries (EB), and nonrecurring models such as the single microlensing
events (µlens-Single) and the M-dwarf flares.
3. ‘Novel’ objects – Pair Instability Supernovae
(PISN), Calcium-rich transients (CaRTs), Intermediate Luminosity Optical Transients (ILOTs), binary micro-lensing events (µlens-Binary).
The simulation generated 100 million sources, and a subset of 3.5 million were predicted to be detected by LSST,
and thus useful for classification and analysis. These data
were provided to participants in PLAsTiCC as 3.5 million light curves in the ugrizY filters containing over 453
million observations. These data formed the ‘test’ sample that PLAsTiCC participants were asked to classify.
The training set consisted of 8000 objects constructed
as a mock-spectroscopic subset of the full data, meant
to mimic the available data from current and near-term
spectroscopic surveys that will be available at the start
of LSST science operations. The differences in numbers
and representation between the training and test data
sets can be seen in Figure 1.
The PLAsTiCC data were simulated to mimic future LSST observations in both the Deep Drilling Fields
(DDF), which are small patches of the sky that will be
sampled often to achieve enhanced depth, and a WideFast-Deep (WFD) survey that covers a larger part of the
sky (at ≃ 18, 000 square degrees it is almost 400 times the
DDF area) that will be observed less frequently. Compared to DDF, WFD will include many more objects
but have lower signal-to-noise ratios. While the PLAsTiCC simulation was performed for one particular survey configuration that is not optimal for transients, classification performance can be used to evaluate survey
design for LSST. We leave this to future work. The extragalactic models were simulated from the PLAsTiCC
models as described in Kessler et al. (2019a) (see Figure 13 for the full simulation procedure) and Kessler
et al. (2019b), by generating a spectral energy distribution (SED) at each epoch for the source, simulating a cosmological distance and peculiar velocity for the source,
computing the lensing seen by that source, redshifting
the SED, and accounting for Galactic extinction. Each
extragalactic object was simulated with a unique redshift, host-galaxy extinction, right ascension and declination, and cadence. The SED is integrated in each filter to produce a light curve for the object. The Galactic
=== PAGE 3 ===
3
Figure 1. Relative numbers of objects of each class between the training (left) and test (right) data of PLAsTiCC. The size of the boxes
are proportional to the relative numbers in each set and the absolute numbers are in parentheses. The simulated ≃ 8000 objects in the
training set were distributed across the data classes in a different ratio compared to the test data of over 3.5 M objects.
models are instead defined by 4-year time sequence of
true magnitudes in the ugrizY filter bands, which are
then sampled to form a light curve. The rates for the
different objects were supplied by the modelers. For the
Galactic models, these rates included a dependence on
Galactic coordinates, while the extragalactic rates were
assumed to be isotropic. Galactic and AGN models were
simulated with unique initial phase, reference-image flux,
right ascension and declination and cadence.
Once the ‘pure’ source model was obtained, it was combined with a noise model specific to the observational
conditions of LSST (Biswas et al. 2020), including the
cadence information, zero points, sky noise, and point
spread function (PSF) (Kessler et al. 2009). The objects
have to be ‘detected’ in order to be included in PLAsTiCC. We required that each source be detected twice
at roughly 5σ in the difference image between two nights
– so sources must be bright and vary in brightness to be
valid PLAsTiCC objects. For detected events, a training subset was tagged as spectroscopically identified, and
another subset was tagged as having a spectroscopically
measured redshift of the host galaxy.
LSST may well discover new transients that are not
captured by current models, and it may be sensitive to
theorized objects that have not yet been observed due to
the limitations of current surveys. Thus the training data
will not be fully representative of the larger test data that
will probe fainter depths and larger redshifts than the
training data. To capture this non-representativity, four
of the models simulated in the PLAsTiCC test data,
namely the PISN, CaRTs, ILOT, µlens-Binary were not
provided in the training set (see Kessler et al. 2019a,
for individual model references). As part of the challenge, participants were asked to classify objects in the
test set into a different class of previously unknown objects described also as the ‘Other’ class. Participants
were not given any information about the ‘Other’ class or
the composite nature of this class, which is discussed in
more detail in Section 3. The simulation procedure and
the models involved are discussed in extensive detail in
Kessler et al. (2019a). The models are provided for use
by the community (PLAsTiCC-Modelers 2019).
2.2. Data validation
One of the most critical parts of developing PLAsTiCC was validating the data, to ensure that all light
curves had been simulated without irregularities or too
large/small errors, and that unphysical correlations (e.g.,
catalog ID number vs. declination) were not present. In
addition, we validated the physical models that were input to the simulations. We also validated and improved
the SNANA simulation code. We list the validations performed on the simulations below.
Unphysical artifacts – When processing light curves
and metadata (additional information on the objects including their sky position, redshift etc.) in order to classify objects, unphysical artifacts or missing light curve
data can lead to leakage. As one example, modelers typically provided SED information starting at 1000 Å or
2000 Å, which will cause the u-band (with central wavelength around 3000 Å) to drop out at extreme redshift
(z ≃ 3). To avoid UV drop-outs in the simulation, we extrapolated the UV flux to 500 Å to ensure that all u-band
observation were included (Kessler et al. 2019a). If left
unchecked, classifiers might use this zero flux as a feature, however this is unphysical and should be ignored.
If we were unable to debug or account for an artifact, the
affected data were removed.
Distribution tests – The PLAsTiCC data were simulated from model objects at a given rate and from
SEDs that were redshifted, and then ‘observed’ in the
LSST bands with suitable noise properties and observing conditions. The first step in the validation procedure
was to perform tests of the distribution properties of the
objects to ensure that they matched those of known objects for models based on observations or expected distributions for theoretically proposed models. We performed checks of the distributions of the maximum and
minimum flux for the objects, their redshift distribution,
and rates. These tests caught a host of minor issues in reported rates; in many cases the model assumptions were
revised for inclusion in the final suite of models. The
real data from LSST will not be validated in exactly the
same way given that much of the initial classification will
=== PAGE 4 ===
4
Extragalactic
0.50
id
row
et
targ
0.25
d
obji
0.00
v
web
Correlation coefficient
0.75
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.00
id
. 00
. 00 +1.00
. 00 +. 03
m
h
Galactic
+. 03 +. 00
_err
ostz
tz
hos
+. 25
gall
. 00 +. 01
+. 35
galb
galb
. 04
row
obji
. 00
. 00
. 03 +. 00 +. 00 +. 00
. 02 +. 02 +. 29 +. 00 +. 01 +. 00
gall hostz stz_err webv objid target rowid
m
ho
+. 00
et
targ
. 01 +. 00
. 00 +. 15
0.75
m
+. 00
+1.00
. 00
. 11
. 00
+. 02
. 00
. 01
. 00
+. 30
+. 13
+. 00
. 01
+. 00
gall
ebv
mw
obji
d
et
targ
row
d
0.50
0.25
0.00
v
web
gall
galb
galb
id
Correlation coefficient
1.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Figure 2. Correlation tests for the simulated WFD PLAsTiCC data. We used this test to detect any spurious correlations between object
ID and type and other properties provided to the contestants. We disambiguate Galactic and extragalactic sources and consider the WFD
and DDF data separately as there are physical correlations that are introduced when aggregating these groups e.g. all Galactic variables
will have a host redshift of z = 0, and all sources within the 4 DDF fields will show strongly-correlated values of the Milky Way reddening.
proceed from the alert stream directly; however quality
cuts on the data will ensure data quality for any light
curves used for a specific scientific question.
Light curve tests – Once the average properties of
the population were inspected, individual light curves
were plotted from the simulated populations. These tests
were particularly relevant for models derived from objects that had previously been observed (rather than objects simulated from purely theoretical models). The
light curves were compared to databases of known examples to diagnose model inconsistencies and shape discontinuities. This validation process led to decisions on
how the PLAsTiCC simulation would handle saturation
in the LSST bands for objects brighter than 16th magnitude. However, we did not want to introduce saturation
issues in the challenge, and instead simulated a saturation level at 12th mag, or 4 mag brighter than nominal. The small number of saturated observations that
remained were removed.
Prior to generating the PLAsTiCC sample, we simulated ‘perfect’ examples of each model type at high cadence and with no noise. These perfect light curves were
compared with the input observations used to generate
the model, and then with the results of small runs of the
simulations in both the DDF (which would probe higher
redshift with higher signal-to-noise) and the WFD, to
test the rates of objects more completely and whether
or not there were objects that would not be detected
given the cadence and brightness specifications of the
survey. Perfect simulations were used to validate the
models while the WFD and DDF light curves were used
to validate the realistic simulations.
Specialized model tests – Depending on the type of
transient or variable, specialized tests on object properties were carried out for individual models. For example
the period-luminosity relationship was tested for variable
objects like the RR-Lyrae. These tests were typically
performed with input from the model proposers directly,
to ensure that the expected model relationships remained
intact in the PLAsTiCC simulations.
Checks on metadata – Once the models were ver-
ified for correctness, the additional data about the objects, or metadata (the redshifts, sky position, Galactic
coordinates, extinction) were analyzed to ensure that the
data are simultaneously useful and exhaustive without
rendering the challenge trivial. This involved iterating
on the form and description of the metadata, knowing
that the user interface/workbook provided to initiate the
challenge would be the place where many participants
got their information. The metadata were also checked
for consistency by, for example, plotting RA and Dec per
target.
Correlations between object variables – Related
to checks of the metadata, we tested for spurious or obvious correlations between object metadata and classification type. A trivial example would be to ensure that the
object ID was in fact randomly generated not only within
a particular type but across various types. If the objects
are simulated in order then there would be a type-ID
correlation which would render the classification challenge trivial. Some astrophysical correlations do exist,
for example the nature of the objects (Galactic vs. extragalactic) is correlated with the redshift. A plot of the
correlation between training set metadata parameters is
shown in Figure 2, where the simulated WFD sample has
been split into Galactic and extragalactic objects. There
are correlations in the metadata, but they are expected.
For example, the redshift is correlated with the redshift
error and the target is associated with the dust reddenning of the Milky Way (Galactic objects will have more
dust than extragalactic). We also do not see unphysical
correlations such as with object ID or row ID.
Simple classification of objects – An additional
test of the robustness of the training set was to train a
‘simple’ random forest classification algorithm (Narayan
et al. 2018; Ho 1995) on the PLAsTiCC data to ensure
that the problem was not trivially solvable, and also provided a rough benchmark for comparing results throughout the challenge. The 11 extracted features per passband are described in Table 2 of Narayan et al. (2018),
and included the autocorrelation length, the kurtosis and
skewness of the magnitude distribution. The classifier
=== PAGE 5 ===
5
was run on the DDF and the WFD separately during the
validation phase and as such was not run on the complete
data set after production. Given that some rare objects
such as the kilonovae were not found in the DDF, a direct comparison of the performance of the simple classifier to the competition entries is less straightforward;
however the simple classifier was merely testing for obvious problems in the simulated sample. In addition, the
simple classifier was not run on the ‘Other’ class objects,
as testing anomaly detection was not part of the validation process. This classification testing (and the other
model validation) was only performed by members of the
PLAsTiCC team who had agreed not to submit an entry
to the challenge, and not to help challenge participants.
Each model type was validated by a subset of the PLAsTiCC development team and was re-validated for each
new version of the simulated data.
2.3. The PLAsTiCC metric
The choice of metric for PLAsTiCC was motivated
by two main drivers: the importance of classification uncertainties and the lack of a single, unifying science goal.
Unlike its predecessor, the SNPCC, which was motivated
by SNe Ia cosmology, PLAsTiCC was motivated by
dozens of science drivers from Galactic population statistics to gravitational wave electromagnetic counterparts.
The metric was designed to be sufficiently generic so that
it would disfavor classifiers that neglected any classes, especially those that are rare in the Universe.
Because the data from LSST is anticipated to be inherently noisy, the PLAsTiCC metric did not reduce the
classification posteriors to deterministic class estimates,
allowing it to include classification uncertainty. In contrast to traditional classification tasks that request a single estimated class m̂n for each classified object n, PLAsTiCC required participants to submit tables of classification posterior probabilities 0 ≤ p(m | dn ) ≤ 1 where
object n = 1, . . . , N belongs to class m = 1, . . . , M , given
the light curve data dn . The PLAsTiCC metric was a
weighted log-loss
L≡−
M
X
wm
m=1
Class number
6
15
16
42
52
53
62
64
65
67
88
90
92
95
99
Weight
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
Table 1
Table of weights and target numbers for the various classification
types included in PLAsTiCC. Rare or interesting objects were
up-weighted to increase their contribution to the total metric.
Astronomy
Other STEM
Not Software
6.8%
3.9%
4.9%
39.9%
Data Science
Unknown
33.7%
10.7%
Student
n=1
Figure 3. Demographic information for entrants to PLAsTiCC.
Only a small fraction of 1315 participants with known demographics were part of the astronomy community. Many of the participants have some data science background. These data were determined from the Kaggle entries or GitHub user pages of the entrants,
future studies will include self-identification information from participants.

(2019), along with an investigation of its assessment of
archetypal classification pathologies.
Nm
X
τn,m ln[p(m | dn )],
(1)
where
τn,m ≡
Class Name
Point source µ-lensing
Tidal disruption event (TDE)
Eclipsing binary event (EBE)
Core-collapse supernova Type II (SNII)
Supernova Type Ia-x (SNIax)
Mira Variable
Core-collapse Supernova Type Ibc (SNIbc)
Kilonova (KN)
M-dwarf
Supernova Type Ia-91bg (SNIa-91bg)
Active galactic nucleus (AGN)
Supernova Type Ia (SNIa)
RR Lyrae
Super Luminous Supernova (SLSN)
‘Other’ class
0
1
mn 6= m
mn = m
(2)
is an indicator variable for the true class. This particular
metric strongly disfavors assigning very low probabilities
to the classes that the classifier thinks are not the correct one, implying that very low entropy classifications
(i.e. with lots of zeros/small values in the vector of class
probabilities) are disfavored.
The weights wm = J/NM , where J = 1 for most
classes, but J = 2 for rare objects, as shown in Table 1.
These weights were chosen by the PLAsTiCC team to
discourage participants from classifying all objects as the
most populous class, ensuring that appropriate attention
was directed to the classification of rare classes that otherwise would not have much influence on a metric that
gave equal weight to all objects. A detailed description
of the PLAsTiCC metric may be found in Malz et al.
2.4. The PLAsTiCC competition
PLAsTiCC ran from Sep 28, 2018 until Dec 17, 2018,
and received entries from 1094 teams around the world
from a variety of different groups. The demographic information of the 1315 participants are summarized in
Figure 3 and was determined from the Kaggle or GitHub
profiles of the participants in each team. Some of the
participants have subsequently deleted their accounts,
or do not have complete profiles, and so Figure 3 provides an estimate of the group demographics. While a
substantial fraction of participants have a background
in data science/software, only a fraction of entrants had
formal astronomy training. A reasonable subset of the
PLAsTiCC participants were students. These included
a group from the University of Warwick in the United
Kingdom who entered PLAsTiCC as part of a class
=== PAGE 6 ===
6
Figure 4. The distribution of the submissions to PLAsTiCC and the log of the PLAsTiCC metric score as a function of time since the
start of the challenge relative to the start of the challenge. The three colored lines indicate the performance of the three prize-winning
entries. As the challenge neared completion, the scores started to asymptote to metric scores of near unity. Note that the competition
remains ‘live’ to this day, hence the few submissions received after the closing deadline.
project.
PLAsTiCC led to publications by participating
groups, including presentations of the winning avocado
algorithm (Boone 2019) and that of the group ‘Day meets
night’ (Gabruseva et al. 2020). The data set itself has
also been used for several publications on classification
methods and anomaly detection approaches (Ishida et al.
2019; Soraisam et al. 2020; Sravan et al. 2020; Dobryakov
et al. 2020; Chaini and Kumar 2020).
Though participants submitted their classifications on
the full PLAsTiCC test data set, the metric was evaluated on representative subsets whose distinctions were
not made known to participants. The metric computed
on one third of the full data set was posted to a “public leader board,” whereas the metric evaluated on the
remaining two-thirds of the test data was the basis for
the official ranking Kaggle used to award the cash prize.
This procedure could be applied to subsets of the data
to determine a classification ‘error’, however Kaggle did
not include any such error estimation in their application
of the PLAsTiCC metric.
This approach of keeping data hidden from participants is in place to discourage ‘probing the leader board’
(hereafter LB probing), wherein one’s position on the LB
is used as a metric on its own to tweak a submitted algorithm until it is tuned to the LB performance. While
this will lead to improved performance in one particular
challenge/realization of the data, this approach does not
yield algorithms robust to changes in data simulation, or
more general intuition-building about the problem.
The distribution of submissions over time and their
corresponding metric values are shown in Figure 4. In-
terest in the challenge grew over time as more participants joined. Kaggle restricts participating teams to a
maximum of five submissions per day, a limitation that
proved critical near the end of the challenge, when participants had to be selective in making submissions that
would best inform final adjustments to their classifiers.
The performance of the three winning solutions are
highlighted in the plot as colored lines. The horizontal clustering of the PLAsTiCC metric near scores of
log[weighted log-loss score] = 1, 1.6 (where the log-loss
score is given in Equation 1) can be seen in the 1dimensional histogram of scores on the right-hand panel
of Figure 4 and could be a result of over-fitting (‘playing
the leader board’), particularly where weighted combinations of classification probabilities for some objects are
used to determine the probabilities of other objects (e.g.
the ‘Other’ class objects).
3. SOLUTIONS TO PLAsTiCC
PLAsTiCC ended on December 17, 2018. The competition was won by Kyle Boone which is described in
Boone (2019), with the second place prize awarded to
Mike & Silogram2 and third place was awarded to “Major Tom, mamas & nyanp”3 . The top three teams were
selected to present their methods at a meeting with the
PLAsTiCC team and the staff at Kaggle.
Figure 5 shows the performance of the top three entries
according to the metrics considered in Malz et al. (2019),
2 The second place solution is described in a Kaggle post.
3 The third place solution is described in two separate posts, one
describing the CNN and another describing the model including
code repositories.
=== PAGE 7 ===
7
Kyle Boone
Mike & Silogram
Major Tom
Normalized Rank
1.05
1.00
0.95
0.90
0.85
Including "Other" class
PLAsTiCC (0.6563)
LogLoss (0.6791)
Excluding "Other" class
Brier (0.2210) PLAsTiCC ( 0.4668)
LogLoss (0.5075)
Brier (0.1526)
Figure 5. The performance of the top three entrants to the PLAsTiCC across three different metrics. In each case a lower score indicates
better performance of the classifier. The left panel shows the metrics for the full test data set including the unseen ‘Other’ class objects. All
classifiers were asked to return probabilities for the ‘Other’ class objects. The right panel shows the scores on the test data set excluding the
‘Other’ class objects. The scores have been normalized to the score of Kyle Boone, indicated in parenthesis on the x-axis label. This plot
illustrates how close the first and second place finish was, and the importance of the unknown objects on the final classifier performance.
In the case where the ‘Other’ class objects were not included, the first and second place positions would have been reversed.
namely the weighted log-loss used in PLAsTiCC, an unweighted log-loss, and the Brier score (Brier 1950, equivalent to the mean square error of the prediciton), normalized to the Kyle Boone score. The left panel shows the
metrics evaluated on the full test set (rather than the 1/3
subset that formed the basis of the PLAsTiCC competition results), while the right panel performance when the
‘Other’ class objects were excluded from the test data.
The scores of the top three entries tighten in that case
and the top two places are reversed, highlighting the importance of returning a classification probability for objects whose class was not present in the training set. All
three top finishers were very close in score throughout the
competition in both the public and the private LBs. We
summarize their solutions and their relative performance
in the subsections that follow.
3.1. Summary of methods used
The Kaggle discussion board was an excellent forum
for the dissemination and discussion of methods used to
provide solutions to PLAsTiCC. The entrants from the
top 124 entrees discussed their solutions on the forum,
and here we briefly summarize the elements used in their
solutions in Table 2 and Table 3 shows the classification
algorithms that were implemented.
Combining multiple approaches – The unifying
characteristic of the solutions is the fact that they employed a mixture of classification approaches from neural networks to gradient boosting. The entrants often
tried different combinations of approaches and adjusted
their mixture within different iterations, effectively playing multiple classification methods ‘against’ each other
internally before submitting their solutions at each step.
We refer to this as ‘Ensemble’ in Table 2. Common
among most solutions was the use of the LightGBM Ke
et al. (2017). Approaches varied when it came to feature
selection. Some groups built on previous attempts by
4 The 7th and 10th place entries did not provide their solutions
on the Kaggle forums so are not included here.
performing template light curve fits to extract features,
using known fitting software such as the SALT2 package
(Guy et al. 2007) or the Bazin et al. (2011) model. Some
used the more time-consuming but less model-dependent
Gaussian process (GP) fitting. Originally developed in
the context of mining surveying (Krige 1951), GP interpolation relies on the assumption that the interpolated
values can be modeled by a Gaussian process, or one in
which the process is defined by a prior covariance, or
kernel. This interpolation allows one to easily map not
only the interpolated values, but the uncertainty band
around the interpolation without assuming any physical
relationship between the variables. This makes it wellsuited to light curve fitting.
A few groups described fitting for hundreds of features
and then using feature importance ranking to reduce the
feature space over which classification was performed.
Data augmentation – Central to the PLAsTiCC challenge was data augmentation, the supplementation of training data with new light curves derived
through small changes to the original training set, and
other approaches to mitigate non-representativity of the
training set and class imbalance in both the training and
test sets. Several groups tried a range of approaches to
augment the data and rectify the class imbalance, which
are discussed in more detail in Section 5, where we illustrate the degeneracies between the ‘Other’ class objects
and the rest of the classes).
The ‘Other’ class objects – One of the most popular methods of computing probabilities for the‘Other’
class was to probe the LB. All of the top models that provided information on their handling of ‘Other’ class objects used LB probing. One approach (‘Weighted Average’) produced a ‘Other’ class probability formed from a
weighted combination of the supernovae class probabilities, and then determined the best weights by optimizing
over their score or position on the LB. The ‘Tuned Combination’ from the MTMN method (see Section 3.4) used
a power law combination of supernovae probabilities and
tuned the power and multiplicative factor using the LB.
=== PAGE 8 ===
8
Final
Rank
1
Kyle Boone
Public
score
0.6706
Private
score
0.6850
2
Mike & Silogram
0.6937
0.6993
Class imbalance
mitigation
Light curve
augmentation
-
3
Major Tom, mamas
& nyanp
Ahmet Erdem
0.6804
0.7002
-
0.6913
0.7042
-
0.7397
0.7523
6
SKZ Lost in
Translation
Stefan Stefanov
0.7933
0.8017
Flux error
augmentation
Flux augmentation
8
rapids.ai
0.7922
0.8091
9
Three Musketeers
0.7921
0.8131
Pseudo label
on test data
-
11
12
Simon Chen
Go Spartans!
0.7948
0.8112
0.8225
0.8265
-
4
5
Name
Non-representativity
mitigation
Data degradation
Model spec-z,
Data degradation
Model spec-z,
Data degradation
Model spec-z
Removed photo-z
Dropped light curve
points, photo-z
augmentation
Dropped light curve p
oints
-
‘Other’ class
Ensemble
Weighted Average
No
Light curve
fit
GP
Probability
Scaling
Tuned
Combination
Weight based on
top prediction
Probability
Scaling
-
Yes
-
Yes
SALT2
Yes
Bazin
Yes
-
Yes
-
-
Yes
Probability
Scaling
Probability
Scaling
Yes
-
No
Yes
SALT2
Bazin
Table 2
Methods employed by classifiers in PLAsTiCC. The scores are taken from the Kaggle site, and illustrate how many methods were tuned
to the public data/scores, and performed worse on the private data. The class imbalance techniques were used to address the fact that
the different classes were present in very different numbers in the data set. Techniques include augmenting the light curve or fluxes, and
adding approximate/pseudo ‘labels’ to the test data to supplement the training data. The non-representativity techniques modified data
to account for the differences in the test and training data (e.g. that the test data were noisier and more sparse) by either degrading the
data (error bars), removing light curve points and modelling the spectroscopic redshift (spec-z) from the photometric redshifts (photo-z).
The light curve fitting techniques included Gaussian Process (GP) interpolation and template fitting (using the Bazin et al. 2011; Guy
et al. 2007, light curve fits). As discussed in Section 3.1, the entrants used a range of methods listed here to derive a probability for the
‘Other’ class objects, and then probed the LB to optimize their procedure. In all columns above, if there is no entry for a given column, it
indicates either that the model did not address the column or that the information was not provided in the write-ups presented on Kaggle.
Name
Kyle Boone
Mike & Silogram
Major Tom, mamas & nyanp
Ahmet Erdem
SKZ Lost in Translation
Stefan Stefanov
rapids.ai
Three Musketeers
Simon Chen
Go Spartans!
Boosted Decision Trees
LightGBM CatBoost XGBoost
3
7
7
3
7
7
3
3
7
3
7
7
3
7
7
7
7
7
3
7
7
3
3
3
3
7
7
3
7
3
NN
7
7
7
3
7
3
7
7
7
7
Neural Nets
CNN RNN
7
7
7
3
3
7
7
7
7
3
7
7
7
3
3
7
7
7
7
7
MLP
7
7
7
7
3
7
3
7
7
7
Table 3
Classification algorithms of the top entrants to PLAsTiCC, sorted into common approaches. A key result of the challenge was the
observation of how different solutions combined various machine learning techniques. The various methods are summarized in Table 4.
They also had two different functions for Galactic and
extragalactic objects. Ahmet Erdem found which classes
that ‘Other’ class objects were not like (TDE, KN, AGN,
SNIa, SNIa-91bg) and applied a constant multiplication
factor found through LB probing depending on which
class had the highest probability outside of those classes.
Four of the top participants used a method that was
shown on a kernel on Kaggle that involved scaling all the
class probabilities with weights based on the LB probing
from another user (‘Probability Scaling’).
Dependence on simulated cadence – While the
PLAsTiCC data were simulated for one proposed observing strategy for the LSST, we note that the features
themselves will in general be strongly dependent on the
particular cadence or observational strategy of a survey.
We leave a full investigation of classification performance
for different observing cadences to future work. In the
subsections below we summarize in more detail the winning solutions.
3.2. Kyle Boone
The overall winner of PLAsTiCC was Kyle Boone,
then a graduate student at the University of California at
Berkeley. His method using GP light curve fitting, data
augmentation and a gradient boost (Friedman 2001) classification strategy is described in detail in Boone (2019),
which presented a slightly improved version of his submission to the PLAsTiCC competition. For the dis-
=== PAGE 9 ===
9
Method
Random Forest
Gradient Boosting
Light Gradient
Boosting Machine
(LightGBM)
CatBoost
XGBoost
Neural Network
(NN)
Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN)
Gated recurrent
unit (GRU)
Multilayer perceptrons
(MLP)
Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN)
Description
Also known as random decision trees, random forests are a
method of classification that constructs many decision trees
between different classes. The mode of multiple trees
is computed to obtain a final classification.
Gradient boosting produces a combined model from
an ensemble of prediction models (often but not
always comprised of decision trees). Each new tree is
fit on a modified version of the original data set, and the weights of
subsequent trees are adjusted according to which objects were difficult
to classify by previous trees (upweighting difficult classifications).
LightGBM is a gradient boosting framework originally
developed by Microsoft, but now open source.
It is based on decision trees.
CatBoost is a popular open-source algorithm for gradient boosting
on decision trees. It includes an implementation of
ordered boosting, and an algorithm for
processing categorical features in data.
XGBoost is another Gradient Boosting algorithm,
which performs tree boosting in parallel.
A neural network mimics the way the human brain operates by
connecting a system of connected nodes (neurons) connected
by edges. The inputs to neurons are real numbers, and the output
of each neuron is computed by some non-linear function
of its inputs. The separate neurons are combined
with different weights.
This is a NN where node edges/connections have a direction to them
This means the RNN can display temporal dynamic behavior.
A popular variant of RNN, GRU includes gating units which
control the amount of information flow inside each recurrent unit
(controlling when the hidden state in a unit should be updated).
MLPs are NNs where each neuron in one layer
is connected to all neurons in the next layer.
CNNs are regularized versions of MLPs
and are commonly used on images.
Reference
Ho (1995)
Friedman (2001)
Ke et al. (2017)
Prokhorenkova et al. (2017)
Chen and Guestrin (2016)
See Schmidhuber (2015)
for a recent
review
Rumelhart et al. (1986)
Cho et al. (2014)
Rosenblatt (1963)
Fukushima (1980)
Table 4
A brief description of the methods used and acronyms in PLAsTiCC.
cussion here, we focus on the version of avocado that
was submitted to PLAsTiCC. Boone was the only astronomer in the top three finishers, and his astronomical
domain knowledge played a role in the choices he made
for feature selection. For example, Boone extracted the
color of the object at maximum light and computed the
time to decline to 20% of maximum light of the transient,
which resulted in a greater accuracy of classification of
SNIa-like objects in avocado than other challenge entries.
Pre-maximum observations are a useful indicator of
the type of a supernova. As a corollary, the lack of
pre-maximum observations can serve as a useful flag of
how discerning the data will be in separating out different classes, and hence are a measure of the accuracy in
classification of the simulations. avocado includes a flag
for ‘incomplete’ simulated light curves, which can help
remove spurious classifications that might degrade the
overall metric score.
Data augmentation also features strongly in Kyle
Boone. The non-representativity of PLAsTiCC led to
a pristine but small training data set and a large (3.5Mobject sized) test data set, with much larger measurement uncertainties. Boone focused on augmenting the
training data by shifting the data in time (without changing the shape of any light curve features), removing or
‘dropping’ observations at random time positions. Boone
also increased the scatter in the data to make it more
representative of the test data quality, as shown in Figure 6. In order to supplement the training data, Boone
generated high-z light curves from low-z analogues by degrading the signal-to-noise ratio as a function of distance.
This data augmentation greatly improved the accuracy
of his avocado. The change of light curve colors with
redshifting of the SED was not included in avocado.
3.3. Mike & Silogram
The second place winners of PLAsTiCC were from
a pair of competitors (Mike and Silogram) who joined
forces to produce an ensemble solution of seven Recurrent
Neural Network classifiers (RNN, Rumelhart et al. 1986)
and two Light Gradient Boosting Machine (LightGBM,
Ke et al. 2017) models. Rather than focus on selecting one classifier, the ensemble provided diversity across
model space, to avoid over fitting the training data.
The RNN model was a one layer bi-directional Gated
Recurrent Unit (GRU, Cho et al. 2014). The 7 different
RNN models used between 80 and 160 units. The input data for the RNN was the flux and its associated
uncertainty, the intervals between the measurements,
the wavelength and passband, which were included with
‘one-hot’ encoding, where combinations of the data are
only those with a single value at a time (see Harris and
Harris 2012, for details on this method). The models
=== PAGE 10 ===
10
u
g
r
200
Augment ID:yduxMeVzNQ
200
100
50
100
50
0
0
50
50
00 0000 0200 0400 0600
6
6
6
6
Time (MJD)
00
598
598
Max Flux in r (counts)
CDF
0
102
100
SNIa
SNII
SNIbc
10 1
Host Photo-z
0
104
Training Sample
3990 objects
103
101
00
00
600
602
Time (MJD)
1
Max Flux in r (counts)
CDF
1
104
z = 0.294
150
Flux (counts)
Flux (counts)
150
Object ID:000002103
i
z
z = 0.170
y
100
0
CDF
1
10% of Augmented Sample
30173 objects
103
102
101
100
10 1
Host Photo-z
100
0
CDF
1
Figure 6. Data augmentation as part of the KB method. The light curves have been interpolated using GP interpolation, shown as
shaded regions with largest spread where there is no data. The top panel shows the augmentation in light curve space, where points are
removed, the object is moved to higher redshift and the errors on the light curve points are increased. The bottom panel illustrates the
augmentation in feature space for a subset of the PLAsTiCC models. The augmented sample not only has a larger spread in the maximum
r−band flux, one of the features used by the avocado classifier but extends each class to higher redshift and helps increase the sample.
reduced the dimensionality by downsampling the layers
and then combined the max pooled layer with light curve
metadata, specifically the host galaxy photo-z and associated error, the Milky Way extinction, and flags for the
observational area/field.
As with the other solutions, the issues of data augmentation and feature selection were perhaps the most
pressing for Mike & Silogram. This method was supplemented to include augmentation near the closing date for
submissions to the competition and so did not have the
opportunity to retrain on a comprehensively augmented
data set. The Mike & Silogram method dropped 30%
of the measurements and adjusted the redshifts and the
flux of the training data.
In the LightGBM models, adjusting the flux values according to the photometrically-derived redshift (photo-z)
value helped ‘normalize’ the flux, effectively correcting
for cosmological redshift of the object, which stretches
spectrum of the object and dims its brightness. While
the photo-z was provided in PLAsTiCC, the spectroscopic redshift (spec-z) is the more useful quantity as
it is free of modeling errors. For both the RNN and
the LightGBM models in this submission, the authors
were able to build a separate model to predict the specz of the host galaxy from the other properties of the
object. This approach is useful particularly to flag potential outliers in photo-z space (incorrectly predicted
photo-z values)5 . This photo-z modeling will be one of
the key systematic issues that the Rubin Observatory
will face, and any mitigation of this issue by classifiers
is very valuable. The Mike & Silogram authors stated
that they converted all time and wavelength-related features to redshift-independent versions before training the
RNN.
3.4. Major Tom, mamas & nyanp
The third place solution also went to a combination of
teams, ‘Major Tom’ and ‘mamas’, themselves made of individuals with different implementations that were com5 This is described in a note on the Kaggle discussion board
online.
=== PAGE 11 ===
11
bined. In addition, ‘nyamp’ provided feature engineering
expertise to the combined group, hereafter known as the
MTMN method. The final solution was a 1D Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) with 256 8,5,3 convolution neurons followed by global max pooling as described
above, with stride of unity. The inputs to the CNN in
this case was a series of 128-long vectors over different
‘channels’. Six of these channels were constructed out
of linear interpolated flux values (as a function of time)
in the 6 bands, while another six were made of linearly
interpolated vectors of flux multiplied by time, which
forms a crude integral in the band. The final 6 channels
in the set described the distance of the current point (in
time) from the true input, effectively providing a vector
describing the interpolation error.
Three different CNNs were constructed based on different metadata features sent to the multilayer perceptron
(MLP) which was the basis for the backpropagation: a
minimal CNN based on using only the galaxy photo-z,
distance modulus, MJD and flux error as metadata; a
minimal CNN supplemented by the 16 best features obtained from features extracted in a separate CatBoost
model framework; a minimal model supplemented by features obtained through template fitting from the Supernova Cosmology package (sncosmo, Barbary et al. 2016).
The models are described in more detail on the Kaggle
discussion boards6 .
4. COMPARISON OF TOP-RANKED CLASSIFIERS BY
ADDITIONAL METRICS
The PLAsTiCC metric was designed to evaluate
submissions of classification probability mass functions
(PMFs) without favoring any particular science case.
For example, cosmological classification efforts have traditionally focused on removing contamination of non-Ia
objects to yield a ‘pure’ SNIa photometric sample, but
metrics that reward only the purity of this class would
be inappropriate for other science goals, such as novelty
detection.
The caveats to the nominally science-agnostic global
metric were twofold. The classification of rare and novel
classes was encouraged by increasing the relative weight
of the contribution of these classes to an overall metric that was otherwise evenly weighted across classes.
This division into classes did not encode class hierarchy;
had all supernova sub-classes been combined into a single class, or had galactic and extragalactic classes been
evaluated separately, it is possible that a metric would
have favored different classifiers.
While the Kaggle metric was required to be a scalar
so that a cash prize could be awarded to an overall winner, the resulting classifications in the form of submitted
PMF catalogs are a much richer data set. In this section,
we compare the top-ranked classifiers by more nuanced
and higher-dimensional metrics of estimated classification PMFs without investigating metrics tuned to any
specific science goals. We leave such an exploration for
future work.
4.1. Pseudo-Confusion Matrices
6 See e.g. the online links for the 3rd place CNN, 3rd place
CatBoost, 3rd place sncosmo entries.
Figure 7. Pseudo-confusion matrices for the top three entries to
PLAsTiCC. The metric score for these entries was 0.68503 (Kyle
Boone), 0.69933 (Mike & Silogram), 0.70016 (Major Tom, mamas
& nyanp). The top entries are described fully in Tables 2 and 3.
=== PAGE 12 ===
12
Figure 8. Similar to Figure 7, but in this case the probabilities assigned to ‘Other’ class objects in the test set are omitted and the
remaining probabilities are renormalized in the test data set. This illustrates more clearly the degeneracies between the known and the
‘Other’ class objects. The large ‘subsuming’ classification systematic visible in Figure 7 that arises since many classifiers provided a
probability for ‘Other’ class objects based on a weighted sum of probabilities from the known objects is no longer present (consider the
SNII-‘Other’ class subsuming systematic in the Kyle Boone entry of Figure 7). We also show the results from the ‘validation classifier’ run
on the WFD data (without ‘Other’ class objects).
The confusion matrix is a classic metric of deterministic classifications (see e.g. Lochner et al. 2016, for one
such astronomical example). To put the PLAsTiCC results into context for those familiar with the confusion
matrix, we present an adaptation thereof to probabilistic classifications. For each classifier, we assign each light
curve a deterministic classification corresponding to the
mode (maximum) of its PMF. To remove the visual domination of class imbalance, we normalize the rows (corresponding to predicted classifications for a given true
class) of a standard confusion matrix, whose cells contain
counts rather than proportions relative to the number of
objects in the true classes.
The pseudo-confusion matrices for the solutions of the
top three classifiers are shown in Figure 7. The matrices show a distinct difference in the performance of the
classifiers when distinguishing between different types of
supernovae, which are clustered in the top left-hand cor-
ner of the diagram. In addition, the degeneracy between
the classification of true ‘Other’ class objects (right column) and Type II supernovae (fourth row of the matrix)
is shown in Figure 7. The degeneracy arises because
three of the four novel objects included in the ‘Other’
class had supernova-like light curves and were difficult
to disentangle from the supernovae. In addition, some
entrants formed a composite classification probability for
this class from a weighted average combination of probabilities of the other classes (notably the SNIbcs and the
SNIas), leading to correlation between the classification
probabilities of specific objects and the ‘Other’ class.
We show the confusion matrices considered without the
‘Other’ class objects in Figure 8. The classifiers were not
rerun without the ‘Other’ class objects. We removed the
‘Other’ class objects from the submissions and renormalized the probabilities. None of the classifiers shown here
attempted to classify ‘Other’ class objects through their
=== PAGE 13 ===
13
machine learning algorithms but instead combined the
probabilities from other classes. The validation classifier
was also run without ‘Other’ class objects such that it
is a better comparison to these confusion matrices than
the ones in Figure 7.
PDF density at nonzero PMF values for SNII and SNIbc,
meaning that they frequently allocated nontrivial probability to the possibility that ‘Other’ class light curves
were SNII and SNIbc.
4.2. Distributions of assigned classification probabilities
When comparing classifiers, it is useful to establish a
notion of general disagreement between the estimated
posterior PMFs across classifiers and classes on the basis of information content. If we had access to the true
PMF values corresponding to the PLAsTiCC data set,
we could measure the loss of information due to using
an estimated PMF g(x) rather than the true PMF f (x)
using the discrete Kullback-Leibler divergence (dKLD)
X
dKLD(f, g) =
f (x) (log[f (x)] − log[g(x)]) ,
(3)
PLAsTiCC required submissions of posterior PMF
vectors comprising a much richer set of resultant data
than solely deterministic metrics such as those related
to the numbers of object classified as true/false positives/negatives. The violin plots of Figure 9 depict
the probability density functions (PDFs) of estimated
PMF values across all predicted classes for each true
class’s light curves, illustrating more than just a summary statistic of the PDF of estimated posterior PMF
values, such as the mode or mean. Though the per-light
curve covariance is lost, such a visualization still conveys
some of the degeneracies between different true and predicted classes, like an expanded form of each row in a
confusion matrix.
For a light curve of a given true class, one would hope
that a classifier would assign it a high probability for
being of that class and low probabilities for being all
other classes. Two panels of Figure 9 show that the winning classifier exemplifies this desirable behavior for true
SNIa and SNIbc by assigning high probabilities for their
true class and low probabilities for all other classes. The
degeneracies between classes can be seen as PDFs of the
estimated posterior PMFs where there is substantial density for a predicted class that is not the true class (i.e.
the peak of the PDF is skewed away from zero for a class
other than the true class). The remaining two panels of
Figure 9 provide illustrations of this undesirable effect:
objects with true SNIax and SNIa-91bg type are assigned
comparable probabilities for several classes including the
true class. Although the centering of the PDF density
around zero PMF for some mismatched classes indicates
that the winning classifier did indeed easily rule out those
incorrect classes, there is also low PDF density at high
PMF for the true class (consider that the PDF drops off
sharply for probability > 0.15 for the SNIax in the top
right panel of Figure 9), meaning that the classifier was
unable to distinguish between those SN sub-types.
Figure 10 isolates the true KN to compare the performance of the top three classifiers to that of the naı̈ve
‘validation’ classifier, whose inclusion is facilitated by
including only light curves evaluated by the validation
classifier that also appeared in the PLAsTiCC data set
and omitting the probabilities assigned to the ‘Other’
class prior to renormalizing the probabilities assigned to
the remaining classes. All of the top three classifiers were
able to classify the true KN objects, as they assigned high
PMF values for the predicted KN class and low PMF values for all other classes. The validation classifier, on the
other hand, assigns nonzero PMF values over all the SN
sub-types, effectively mis-classifying KN as SN without
being able to distinguish the SN sub-type.
Figure 11 shows the performance of the top three classifiers on the ‘Other’ class. All three top classifiers successfully isolated the ‘Other’ class light curves from most
of the named classes and for the most part successfully
assigned a higher posterior PMF value for the correct
class. However, all three top classifiers also had high
4.2.1. Classifier disagreement
x
where x takes categorical values corresponding to each
class, and the sum is over the set of x values for which
f (x) > 0. To summarize these per-light curve values, one
can calculate the continuous Kullback-Leibler divergence
(cKLD) of the PDFs g(x), f (x) of approximating PMFs
relative to those of the true PMFs, respectively,
Z
cKLD(f, g) = f (x) (log[f (x)] − log[g(x)]) dx, (4)
where x is now the set of real numbers between 0 and 1.
In either case, the KLD is measured in nats, the unit of
base-e information. The appendix of Malz et al. (2018)
is a good primer on the KLD including a demonstration
to build intuition for the behavior of the KLD in limiting
cases. The true PMF is approximated from the Kaggle
metric as follows. If we were to assume that the Kaggle
ranking metric correctly orders classifiers by how close
their submitted PMFs are to the (unknown) true PMFs,
then this ordering is sufficient to define a directionality
for evaluating the KLD.7
To visualize the disagreements between classifiers, we
convert the KLD values computed per true class per each
predicted class and per light curve within a true-class.
The cKLD of Equation 4 corresponds to the divergence
for one pair of true and predicted class. The per-trueclass sum of the cKLD over the PDFs of per-predictedclass PMFs is interpretable as a measure of the information about that true class. A final scalar value may
be made by taking the weighted sum of these per-trueclass cKLD terms using the per-true-class weights of the
original Kaggle metric (as defined in Table 1). This integrated KLD may then be interpreted as the value of the
information loss due to using the approximating classifier rather than the one that is closer to the truth. The
results of a summation of the pairwise KLD between the
per-true class, per-predicted class PDFs of PMF values
of each classifier as an approximation to those of all classifiers ranked better is presented in Figure 12.
The scalar KLD values of the pairs span three orders of base-e magnitude; however, if we exclude the 8th
ranked classifier, then the pairwise information losses in
the PDFs of PMFs only span two base-e orders of magnitude.
7 The validity of this assumption is equivalent to KLD[i + 1; i −
1] = KLD[i + 1; i] + KLD[i; i − 1], which is formally untrue for this
data set, but the assumption is useful in this context.
=== PAGE 14 ===
14
Figure 9. The estimated posterior probabilities (violins) for each predicted class (columns) among a given true class (panels) for the Kyle
Boone method, where the assigned class corresponding to the true class is highlighted in color. Top row: The estimated probabilities for
well-classified SNIa and those of the less well-classified SNIax. The assigned probability of being the true class for SNIa has a long tail but
a high mode of ∼ 0.8, whereas SNIax are degenerate with the ‘Other’ class type, whose mode is ∼ 0.2. Bottom row: The classification
probabilities for SNIa-91bg and SNIbc (core-collapse SN). The estimated classification probabilities for true SNIa-91bg objects reflects
uncertainty; while roughly two thirds of the true SNIa-91bg objects have a mode corresponding to the predicted SNIa-91bg class, their
classification probabilities span the entire range of probability. The uncertainty of estimated probabilities for SNIbc objects manifests
differently; the probability for predicted class SNIbc has a less pronounced tail, but there is considerable probability mass assigned to
predicted ‘Other’ class. This is not surprising given that the Kyle Boone classifier determined the ‘Other’ class classification probability
from a combination of the probabilities of the SNIa, SNIbc, and SNII.
Figure 10. Performance of the ‘validation’ classifier compared
to the top three entries to PLAsTiCC. The naı̈ve classifier does
not correctly classify the rare KN objects, while a classifier more
optimized to find rare objects through data augmentation is a very
accurate classifier of these bright transients.
The reason for this large range in KLD values is that
the affected classifier (‘8 rapidsai’) assigned nearly deter-
ministic classifications to the M-dwarf class, meaning the
PMF values tended to be approximately 1 for one predicted class and approximately 0 for all other predicted
classes. This choice induced long tails in the per-assigned
class PDFs of true M-dwarf PMF values, to which the
KLD is known to be sensitive, particularly when the PDF
taken as closer to truth is affected.
Figure 12 illustrates a few additional trends. The top
two classifiers disagree more strongly with all other classifiers than the other classifiers do with one another. The
class for which the discrepancy is greatest varies quite a
bit among classifier pairs, but aside from the outlier classifier discussed above, the KN and Mira objects appear
most discrepant often, indicating that the other ranked
classifiers’ strategies resulted in very different classification performance on those classes in particular.
4.3. Precision-Recall Plots
Deterministic classifiers are often evaluated using functions of the true and false positive and negative rates.
The true positive (TP) rate is the ratio of TP classifications to the sum of both the TP and false negative
(FN) classifications NTP /(NTP + NFN ). The false posi-
=== PAGE 15 ===
15
Figure 11. Performance of the top three classifiers for the ‘Other’
class. The predicted probability distributions for the 13087 true
type ‘Other’ class objects. The numbers in different colors reflect how many objects were incorrectly classified as a given type
by each of the three classifiers, and the shaded regions show the
predicted probability distributions for each class. Note how the
‘Other’ class is most often confused with SNII and SNIbc. This occurred as a result of many of the classifiers generating their ‘Other’
class probability as a combination of probabilities from the other
classes.
tive (FP) rate is the ratio of the FPs to the sum of both
FP and true negative (TN) rate. One example of such
a function is the receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curve, the TP rate as a function of the FP rate for a
given classifier.
Another is the precision-recall (also referred to
as ‘completeness-purity’) plot of the precision P =
NTP /(NTP + NFP ) as a function of the recall R =
NTP /(NTP + NFN ). Recall is a performance measure
of the TP compared to total actual positives, whether
TP or FN, whereas precision is a performance measure of
TP predictions compared to the total positive predictions
(whether true or false). We choose to use precision-recall
plots over ROC curves because they are appropriate for
imbalanced data sets (see e.g. Saito and Rehmsmeier
2015). The precision and recall are calculated for different values of the threshold of the classifier to map
the performance of both as a function of threshold. We
require higher classification confidence with increasing
threshold values. As the threshold increases, our precision increases and recall (akin to sensitivity) decreases.
Good performance on these plots would be indicated by
having high precision and high recall, which would indicate that the classifiers are returning a lot of labels that
are accurate.
A perfect classifier in these plots would have a precision
of one for all recall. A bad classifier will output scores
whose values are only slightly associated with the true
outcome, and so will achieve high recall for low values of
precision. Figure 13 shows examples of precision-recall
plots for three different objects classified by the top three
classifiers and the validation classifier. For the top three
participants, SLSN are more well-classified than KN or
TDE but are not perfectly classified.
The classifiers also did approximately the same in precision and recall for TDEs. Of the transient events shown
in this example, the KN are the most easily misclassified.
This object has low precision, meaning that true positive
classifications are a small fraction of total positive clas-
sifications. As the threshold value increases (needed to
improve the precision performance), the recall (true positives relative to true positives and false negatives) drops
relatively slowly as the number of false negatives is high
for the KN class. The greatest contaminants to KN classification are SNIa and SNII, which is seen in both the
PLAsTiCC simulations and in the Dark Energy Survey
observations (Doctor et al. 2017; Morgan et al. 2020).
The MTMN and MS methods have a poor performance
on this class throughout the plot whereas the KB method
has good early “retrieval”.
The SLSN have high values of recall for a range of
thresholds, with P > 0.9 for all thresholds > 0.7, indicating it is a well-classified object. TDE require a high
threshold to be correctly classified, but then plateau at
constant P for threshold & 0.9 for all classifiers. For the
SLSN, the validation classifier performed significantly
better than the top three classifiers, reaching P ≃ 1 for
thresholds & 0.25.
4.3.1. Redshift evolution of metrics
While the global precision-recall plots for various classifiers and types are shown in Figure 13, it is worth considering the evolution of the classifier performance with
redshift. In Figure 14, we show the precision and recall of the top three classifiers as a function of redshift
for given threshold value of ∼ 0.6 for two object types,
namely SNeIa and TDEs. Also shown are the redshift
distributions of the transients. The relative numbers of
TDE peak at lower redshift (while there are still greater
total numbers of SNIa than TDE at all redshifts), leading to a peak in recall. The precision of the classifier
peaks later, with the corresponding drop in the recall.
This behavior is also seen in Figure 13 which shows the
precision-recall curves as a function of threshold value
rather than redshift. The ability to classify objects well
with increasing redshift is driven in part by the redshift
distribution of the sources themselves, and by the quality of data augmentation of the training set. As noted in
Boone (2019), prioritization of completeness of a given
survey as a function of redshift will lead to rather different tuning of classifier performance.
5. DISCUSSION OF CHALLENGES IN THE
PLAsTiCC DATA
The PLAsTiCC data set was rich in complexity and
highly non-representative.
Detection of novel objects – An additional class in
the test set but not present in the training set, named the
‘Other’ class, added the task of anomaly detection to the
challenge. This unseen class proved challenging and led
to confusion classifications that exhibit the ‘subsumedto’ behavior as described in Malz et al. (2019), where a
first class is consistently mistaken for a second, but the
second class is not commonly mistaken for the first. In
Figure 8 we show the confusion matrices for the same
entries as in Figure 7. In this case while the ‘Other’
class objects were included in the test set, the classifiers
did not return a classification for the objects (hence the
predicted probabilities are set to zero for these objects).
Hence while the true ‘Other’ class objects have predicted
probabilities of the other classes by construction, the
subsuming probability systematic where true objects are
confused for ‘Other’ class objects is reduced. This can
=== PAGE 16 ===
16
Figure 12. The disagreement matrix for the top classifiers. Colors indicate the disagreement metric between each classifier (x-axis) and
all classifiers ranked better than it (y-axis), where darker cells correspond to lower Kullback-Leibler Divergence from the worse-ranked
classifiers’ probability densities of assigned posterior classification probabilities to those of the better-ranked classifier. The higher- and
lower-ranked classifier pairs’ cells are labeled with the class that was most different between the two classifiers and percentage of the total
disagreement between the two classifiers for which that class is responsible. The methods used by each classifier are summarized in Table 2.
be most easily observed for the SNII objects in e.g. the
Kyle Boone classifier. We do not investigate separately
the confusion between the four sub-classes that made up
the ‘Other’ class, however future work and larger simulations could tease out the relative confusion of these
interesting objects with well-known types.
This confusion between the other classes and the
‘Other’ class objects is illustrated in Figure 9 through
violin plots of probability density of the posterior probability assigned to each predicted class, for a given true
class. There are a few things worth noting in the violin plots. First, the distribution of probability extends
to zero for some true objects, like the SNIa-91bg which
is shown in the bottom left panel of Figure 9, indicating that this true type is intrinsically uncertain. For the
true type SNIbc, the violin plots are even more interesting. Here the violin plot for the ‘Other’ class has a peak
at P(type) = 0.4 significantly away from zero. This arises
from the fact that the assigned probability of the ‘Other’
class in Boone’s solution was derived as a combination
of probabilities from SNIa, SNIbc and SNII.
Feature selection – The participants in the PLAs-
TiCC challenge were unanimous that the biggest challenge they faced was the extraction of features from the
large training and test sets of PLAsTiCC. Feature extraction is often the limiting factor in these classification
challenges. Given the existence and use of the Bazin
et al. (2011) light curve fitting model (which is a fourparameter model that tends to zero flux as t → ±∞)
which is in many commonly-used astronomical codes,
many groups started with fits to the model, and trained
their classifiers on the fit parameters. Consistently one of
the top features was either the host galaxy photometric
redshift or a proxy for the spectroscopic redshift modeled
from the photometric redshift. Only two of the top ten
PLAsTiCC entries did not include an estimate of the
redshift or the distance modulus. The maximum flux
was also frequently used as a feature for classification.
The Kyle Boone classifier included many signal-to-noise
features whereas most other submissions traced the timedependent movements of the light curves between the
maximum and minimum flux. Many people used some
form of the ratios of flux in different filters (essentially a
‘color’) as classification features.
=== PAGE 17 ===
17
Figure 13. The precision-recall plots for the top three classifiers and the ‘validation’ classifier as a function of threshold (color) for three
classes of interest: KN, TDE, and SLSN.
GP regression proved a more model-independent approach, but added the complexity of ensuring the correct
choice of kernel to do the regression.
Non-representativity of the PLAsTiCC test
data – LSST will map out the sky to a co-added magnitude depth of 27 − 28 and a single-visit depth of 24 in
the various bands. This depth will yield a survey that
has orders of magnitude more objects than current widefield surveys. No current survey will be capable of providing distributions of classes as a function of redshift
that will be representative for LSST. Any classifications
performed based on low-z training sets will by definition
be incomplete. To emphasize the importance of developing classifiers robust to this, the PLAsTiCC training
set is non-representative by design. The training set of
7486 objects were chosen to represent a probable spectroscopic survey made from a combination of objects from
the Dark Energy Survey (DES) and other low-redshift
surveys like the Foundations survey (Foley et al. 2018).
The procedure for determining the spectroscopic training
sample is outlined in Section 6.4 of Kessler et al. (2019a).
The roughly 3 million objects in the test set not only had
a different redshift distribution, but included the ‘Other’
class as a way to test robustness of classifiers to new
objects and provide a sample for anomaly detection, as
discussed above.
A small fraction of the 3 million test objects included
spectroscopic ‘confirmation’ and therefore had a small
redshift error, while others had their redshifts assigned
according to an example of the projected LSST photometric redshift performance. A small bias to the photo-z
values is introduced as a result of the broad band data
and training process. Many groups used the photo-z
and/or the flux information to determine a proxy for
the more informative spectroscopic redshift, which was
used to determine an effective distance for the objects.
These are labeled as ‘Model spec-z’ in Table 2. We leave
it to future work to investigate the impact the photo-z
bias had on classification performance explicitly. Several
groups performed data augmentation to address some of
the issues with non-representativity of the data by resampling in time to match the cadence of the test data,
and adding noise to the training data that was similar
to the (larger) scatter in the test data, as summarized in
Table 2.
Class imbalance in PLAsTiCC – In addition to the
test data being non-representative of the training data
set, the classes within the training and test data sets
=== PAGE 18 ===
18
ing objects without a unifying science application and to
prepare for future data that will contain novel/unknown
objects that require classification and flagging for observational follow-up.
Accurate classification of transients in future surveys
remains one of the key challenges for time-domain observational astrophysics. While astronomers with domain
knowledge are able to develop classification/selection
methods tailored to individual science cases, the creativity and flexibility of the data science entries to PLAsTiCC suggests a collaborative future across disciplines
will be key to making progress.
The PLAsTiCC challenge yielded a few key insights:
• data augmentation of sparse non-representative
training data are key to accurate performance on
the full test set;
• a metric weighted by the number of objects in a
class ensures that classification performance on the
most populous class does not dominate overall performance;
• data fitting and feature selection are the most computationally time-consuming parts of any classification challenge;
• one successful approach is pulling out a larger set
of features over which to train, and then determining the feature importance before classifying the
objects on the smaller subset of features;
• objects with similar light curve shapes are broadly
degenerate (e.g. SNIax and SNIa) and may present
challenges to future surveys, motivating the inclusion of additional information about the host
galaxy, where applicable;
Figure 14. The precision and recall as a function of redshift for
the SNIa objects (top panels) and TDE (bottom panels). The
average value of the threshold used across the classifiers is indicated
in text on the figure. The shaded distributions in each panel show
the fractional distribution of the numbers of the transients as a
function of redshift. The total number of transients in the sample is
also indicated. The evolution with redshift of the metrics depends
both on the redshift distribution of the objects and the evolution
of the light curves with changing redshift.
had significantly different proportions relative to the total population of objects. This class imbalance reflects
true imbalances in nature, and was hence a designed feature of PLAsTiCC. Successful classifiers accounted for
these imbalances by oversampling rare light curves, augmenting fluxes and errors or including test data with
pseudo labels. The approaches employed by the various
classifiers are shown in Table 2.
6. CONCLUSION
The PLAsTiCC studies evaluate the classification
probabilities derived by a range of methods for classifying a heterogeneous assortment of astronomical transients and variables. While previous challenges and data
sets have focused on classifier performance related to one
type of object or science case, PLAsTiCC represents
the most complete simulation of future photometric surveys to date and challenged the community to take into
account degeneracies between different types of interest-
• no strong preference for any one machine learning architecture was found; successful classification
procedures often combine a range of methods from
neural networks to tree-based approaches;
• domain knowledge helped mainly in identifying
more useful features over which to train, which was
an asset, given that this was often the most timeconsuming part of the classification;
• all classifiers struggled to classify objects with low
frequency in the training data, or novel (unknown)
objects
Classifying objects from their photometric information
alone will unlock the potential of using these interesting
objects in a range of science applications.
This challenge assumed that the full light curves for
the objects were available. Long-lived transients can be
followed up with ground-based resources within a few
days of detection in a photometric survey. For some of
the most interesting objects, however, waiting even a few
days will mean losing valuable information about the evolution of the transient. As such, early classification of
these bright objects becomes essential. We did not focus
on the problem of early classification in PLAsTiCC, but
the next step in using these simulations to prepare for
LSST will be to provide an extra performance score to
=== PAGE 19 ===
19
classifiers capable of rapidly classifying transient sources,
based on both their light curves and any additional data
about their environment and location. This may prove
more challenging or prone to bias than classification using the full light curve.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper has undergone internal review in the
LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration.
Author contributions are listed below.
R. Hložek: data curation, formal analysis, funding
acquisition, investigation, project administration, software, supervision, validation, visualization, writing editing, lead writing - original draft
K. Ponder: software development and implementation
for validation, testing, visualization and analysis of
results, writing - editing, writing - original draft
A.I. Malz: conceptualization, formal analysis, investigation, methodology, visualization, writing - editing,
writing - original draft
M. Dai: software development and implementation for
validation, testing, analysis of results, writing - editing
G. Narayan: simulation, software, example kit, validation, visualization, writing - editing, writing - original
draft
E.E.O. Ishida: software development and implementation for validation, testing, Kaggle liason, analysis of
results, writing - editing
T. Allam Jr: investigation, development of software for
simulation validation
A. Bahmanyar: investigation, implementation of metric
methodology and software
R. Biswas: conceptualization, methodology, software for
validation and testing, writing - editing
L. Galbany: implementation of validation software,
writing - editing
S.W. Jha: conceptualization, simulation validation
D. Jones: conceptualization, simulation validation,
writing - editing
R. Kessler: simulation development and validation
testing, data generation, writing - editing
M. Lochner: conceptualization, simulation validation,
writing - editing
A.A. Mahabal: conceptualization, simulation validation
K.S. Mandel: conceptualization, simulation validation,
writing - editing
J.R. Martı́nez-Galarza: conceptualization, simulation
validation, writing - editing
J.D. McEwen: conceptualization, simulation validation
D. Muthukrishna: conceptualization, simulation validation, results analysis and testing, writing - editing
H.V. Peiris: conceptualization, supervision, funding
acquisition, writing - editing
C.M. Peters: conceptualization, simulation validation
C.N. Setzer: conceptualization, simulation validation
The Photometric LSST Astronomical Time Series
Classification Challenge data set generation relied on
numerous members of the astronomical community to
provide models of astronomical transients and variables.
Photometric LSST Astronomical Time Series Classification Challenge is made possible through an intercollaboration agreement between LSST’s Dark Energy
Science Collaboration and the Transient and Variable
Stars Science Collaboration. These models are described
in Kessler et al. (2019a). We are grateful to Federica
Bianco and staff at NYU for hosting the PLAsTiCC team
meeting. The awards for PLAsTiCC contest were generously supported by Kaggle. We thank staff at Kaggle,
particularly Elizabeth Park, Maggie Demkin and Sohier
Dane, for their help making the contest a success. We
thank Federica Bianco, Francisco Förster Burón, Chad
Schafer and Melissa Graham for providing internal review of this document for the DESC and TVS collaborations, and thank Seth Digel for comments on this
draft. This work was supported by an LSST Corporation
Enabling Science grant. The financial assistance of the
National Research Foundation (NRF) towards this research is hereby acknowledged. Opinions expressed and
conclusions arrived at, are those of the authors and are
not necessarily to be attributed to the NRF. UK authors acknowledge funding from the Science and Technology Funding Council. Canadian co-authors acknowledge support from the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada. The Dunlap Institute is
funded through an endowment established by the David
Dunlap family and the University of Toronto. The authors at the University of Toronto acknowledge that the
land on which the University of Toronto is built is the
traditional territory of the Haudenosaunee, and most
recently, the territory of the Mississaugas of the New
Credit First Nation. They are grateful to have the opportunity to work in the community, on this territory.
R. H. acknowledges support from CIFAR, and the Azrieli
and Alfred. P. Sloan foundations. K. A .P. acknowledges support from the Berkeley Center for Cosmological
Physics; the Director, Office of Science, Office of High
Energy Physics of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231; and U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science under Contract
No.DE-AC02-76SF00515. E. E. O. I. acknowledges support from CNRS 2017 MOMENTUM grant. A. I. M
acknowledges support from the Max Planck Society and
the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation in the framework of the Max Planck-Humboldt Research Award endowed by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research. L. G. was funded by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the
Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 839090.
D. O. J acknowledges support provided by NASA Hubble Fellowship grant HST-HF2-51462.001 awarded by
the Space Telescope Science Institute, which is operated
by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc., for NASA, under contract NAS5-26555.
D.O.J. also acknowledges support from the Gordon &
Betty Moore Foundation. This work has been partially
supported by the Spanish grant PGC2018-095317-B-C21
within the European Funds for Regional Development
(FEDER). C. N. S., R. B. and H. V. P. were partially
supported by the research environment grant “Gravitational Radiation and Electromagnetic Astrophysical
Transients (GREAT)” funded by the Swedish Research
Council (VR) under Dnr 2016-06012. RB and HVP
were additionally supported by the research project grant
“Understanding the Dynamic Universe” funded by the
Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation under Dnr KAW
2018.0067. M. D. acknowledges support from the Horizon Fellowship at the Johns Hopkins University. At Rut-
=== PAGE 20 ===
20
gers University (M. D., S. W. J.), this research was supported by NSF award AST-1615455 and DOE award DESC0011636. The DESC acknowledges ongoing support
from the Institut National de Physique Nucléaire et de
Physique des Particules in France; the Science & Technology Facilities Council in the United Kingdom; and the
Department of Energy, the National Science Foundation,
and the LSST Corporation in the United States. DESC
uses resources of the IN2P3 Computing Center (CCIN2P3–Lyon/Villeurbanne - France) funded by the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique; the National
Energy Research Scientific Computing Center, a DOE
Office of Science User Facility supported by the Office
of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231; STFC DiRAC HPC Facilities, funded by UK BIS National E-infrastructure capital grants; and the UK particle physics grid, supported
by the GridPP Collaboration. This work was performed
in part under DOE Contract DE-AC02-76SF00515.
REFERENCES
LSST Science Collaboration, P. A. Abell, J. Allison, S. F.
Anderson, J. R. Andrew, J. R. P. Angel, L. Armus, D. Arnett,
S. J. Asztalos, T. S. Axelrod, et al., arXiv e-prints
arXiv:0912.0201 (2009), 0912.0201.
Ž. Ivezić, S. M. Kahn, J. A. Tyson, B. Abel, E. Acosta,
R. Allsman, D. Alonso, Y. AlSayyad, S. F. Anderson,
J. Andrew, et al., ApJ 873, 111 (2019), 0805.2366.
R. Kessler, B. Bassett, P. Belov, V. Bhatnagar, H. Campbell,
A. Conley, J. A. Frieman, A. Glazov, S. González-Gaitán,
R. Hlozek, et al., PASP 122, 1415 (2010), 1008.1024.
R. Kessler, J. P. Bernstein, D. Cinabro, B. Dilday, J. A. Frieman,
S. Jha, S. Kuhlmann, G. Miknaitis, M. Sako, M. Taylor, et al.,
PASP 121, 1028 (2009), 0908.4280.
R. Kessler, G. Narayan, A. Avelino, E. Bachelet, R. Biswas, P. J.
Brown, D. F. Chernoff, A. J. Connolly, M. Dai, S. Daniel,
et al., PASP 131, 094501 (2019a), 1903.11756.
R. Kessler, D. Brout, C. B. D’Andrea, T. M. Davis, S. R. Hinton,
A. G. Kim, J. Lasker, C. Lidman, E. Macaulay, A. Möller,
et al., MNRAS 485, 1171 (2019b), 1811.02379.
R. Biswas, S. F. Daniel, R. Hložek, A. G. Kim, P. Yoachim, and
LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration, ApJS 247, 60
(2020), 1905.02887.
PLAsTiCC-Modelers, Libraries & Recommended Citations for
using PLAsTiCC Models (2019), URL
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2612896.
G. Narayan, T. Zaidi, M. D. Soraisam, Z. Wang, M. Lochner,
T. Matheson, A. Saha, S. Yang, Z. Zhao, J. Kececioglu, et al.,
ApJS 236, 9 (2018), 1801.07323.
T. K. Ho, in Proceedings of 3rd International Conference on
Document Analysis and Recognition (IEEE Computer Society,
Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 1995), vol. 1, p. 278, URL https:
//doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/ICDAR.1995.598994.
A. I. Malz, R. Hložek, J. Allam, T., A. Bahmanyar, R. Biswas,
M. Dai, L. Galbany, E. E. O. Ishida, S. W. Jha, D. O. Jones,
et al., AJ 158, 171 (2019), 1809.11145.
K. Boone, AJ 158, 257 (2019), 1907.04690.
T. Gabruseva, S. Zlobin, and P. Wang, Journal of Astronomical
Instrumentation 9, 2050005-3986 (2020), 1909.05032.
E. E. O. Ishida, M. V. Kornilov, K. L. Malanchev, M. V.
Pruzhinskaya, A. A. Volnova, V. S. Korolev, F. Mondon,
S. Sreejith, A. Malancheva, and S. Das, arXiv e-prints
arXiv:1909.13260 (2019), 1909.13260.
M. D. Soraisam, A. Saha, T. Matheson, C.-H. Lee, G. Narayan,
A. K. Vivas, C. Scheidegger, N. Oppermann, E. W. Olszewski,
S. Sinha, et al., ApJ 892, 112 (2020), 2002.11225.
N. Sravan, D. Milisavljevic, J. M. Reynolds, G. Lentner, and
M. Linvill, ApJ 893, 127 (2020), 2003.08943.
S. Dobryakov, K. Malanchev, D. Derkach, and M. Hushchyn,
arXiv e-prints arXiv:2006.10489 (2020), 2006.10489.
S. Chaini and S. S. Kumar, arXiv e-prints arXiv:2006.12333
(2020), 2006.12333.
G. W. Brier, Monthly Weather Review 78, 1 (1950), ISSN
0027-0644, URL
https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0493(1950)078<0001:
VOFEIT>2.0.CO;2.
G. Bazin, V. Ruhlmann-Kleider, N. Palanque-Delabrouille,
J. Rich, E. Aubourg, P. Astier, C. Balland, S. Basa, R. G.
Carlberg, A. Conley, et al., A&A 534, A43 (2011).
J. Guy, P. Astier, S. Baumont, D. Hardin, R. Pain, N. Regnault,
S. Basa, R. G. Carlberg, A. Conley, S. Fabbro, et al., A&A
466, 11 (2007), astro-ph/0701828.
G. Ke, Q. Meng, T. Finley, T. Wang, W. Chen, W. Ma, Q. Ye,
and T.-Y. Liu, in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 30, edited by I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio,
H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett
(Curran Associates, Inc., 2017), pp. 3146–3154.
D. G. Krige, Master’s thesis, University of Witwatersrand,
Witwatersrand, South Africa (1951).
J. H. Friedman, The Annals of Statistics 29, 1189 (2001), ISSN
00905364, URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/2699986.
L. Prokhorenkova, G. Gusev, A. Vorobev, A. Veronika Dorogush,
and A. Gulin, arXiv e-prints arXiv:1706.09516 (2017),
1706.09516.
T. Chen and C. Guestrin, arXiv e-prints arXiv:1603.02754 (2016),
1603.02754.
J. Schmidhuber, Neural Networks 61, 85 (2015), ISSN
0893-6080, URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0893608014002135.
D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams, Nature 323,
533 (1986).
K. Cho, B. van Merrienboer, C. Gulcehre, D. Bahdanau,
F. Bougares, H. Schwenk, and Y. Bengio, arXiv e-prints
arXiv:1406.1078 (2014), 1406.1078.
F. Rosenblatt, American Journal of Psychology 76, 705 (1963).
K. Fukushima, Biological cybernetics 36, 193—202 (1980), ISSN
0340-1200, URL https://doi.org/10.1007/bf00344251.
D. Harris and S. Harris, Digital design and computer architecture
(Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA, 2012), ISBN
978-0-12-394424-5.
K. Barbary, T. Barclay, R. Biswas, M. Craig, U. Feindt,
B. Friesen, D. Goldstein, S. Jha, S. Rodney, C. Sofiatti, et al.,
SNCosmo: Python library for supernova cosmology (2016),
1611.017.
M. Lochner, J. D. McEwen, H. V. Peiris, O. Lahav, and M. K.
Winter, ApJS 225, 31 (2016), 1603.00882.
A. I. Malz, P. J. Marshall, J. DeRose, M. L. Graham, S. J.
Schmidt, and R. W. and, The Astronomical Journal 156, 35
(2018), URL https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/aac6b5.
T. Saito and M. Rehmsmeier, PLoS ONE 10 (2015).
Z. Doctor, R. Kessler, H. Y. Chen, B. Farr, D. A. Finley, R. J.
Foley, D. A. Goldstein, D. E. Holz, A. G. Kim, E. Morganson,
et al., ApJ 837, 57 (2017), 1611.08052.
R. Morgan, M. Soares-Santos, J. Annis, K. Herner, A. Garcia,
A. Palmese, A. Drlica-Wagner, R. Kessler, J. Garcia-Bellido,
T. G. B. N. Sherman, et al., arXiv e-prints arXiv:2006.07385
(2020), 2006.07385.
R. J. Foley, D. Scolnic, A. Rest, S. W. Jha, Y. C. Pan, A. G.
Riess, P. Challis, K. C. Chambers, D. A. Coulter, K. G.
Dettman, et al., MNRAS 475, 193 (2018), 1711.02474.
=== PAGE 21 ===
