=== PAGE 1 ===
Draft version July 6, 2023
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX63
First Impressions: Early-Time Classification of Supernovae using Host Galaxy Information and Shallow Learning
,1, 2, 3, 4, 5 Gabriella Contardo ,3 Daniel Foreman Mackey
Patrick D. Aleo 1, 2, 4
Alexander Gagliano
,3 Alex I. Malz
,6 and
1 Department of Astronomy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1002 W. Green St., IL 61801, USA
2 National Center for Supercomputing Applications, Urbana, IL, 61801, USA
3 Flatiron Institute Center for Computational Astrophysics, New York City, NY 10010, USA
4 Center for Astrophysical Surveys, Urbana, IL, 61801, USA
5 National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellow
arXiv:2305.08894v3 [astro-ph.IM] 3 Jul 2023
6 McWilliams Center for Cosmology, Department of Physics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
ABSTRACT
Substantial effort has been devoted to the characterization of transient phenomena from photometric information. Automated approaches to this problem have taken advantage of complete phase-coverage of an event,
limiting their use for triggering rapid follow-up of ongoing phenomena. In this work, we introduce a neural
network with a single recurrent layer designed explicitly for early photometric classification of supernovae. Our
algorithm leverages transfer learning to account for model misspecification, host galaxy photometry to solve the
data scarcity problem soon after discovery, and a custom weighted loss to prioritize accurate early classification.
We first train our algorithm using state-of-the-art transient and host galaxy simulations, then adapt its weights
and validate it on the spectroscopically-confirmed SNe Ia, SNe II, and SNe Ib/c from the Zwicky Transient
Facility Bright Transient Survey. On observed data, our method achieves an overall accuracy of 82 ± 2% within
3 days of an event’s discovery, and an accuracy of 87 ± 5% within 30 days of discovery. At both early and
late phases, our method achieves comparable or superior results to the leading classification algorithms with a
simpler network architecture. These results help pave the way for rapid photometric and spectroscopic follow-up
of scientifically-valuable transients discovered in massive synoptic surveys.
Keywords: supernovae(1668), light curve classification(1954), neural networks(1933)
1. INTRODUCTION
Decades of spectroscopic insights have motivated the construction of a hierarchical classification taxonomy for the
death knells of stars as supernovae (SNe; Filippenko 1997;
Gal-Yam 2017). At its core are the four most commonlyobserved classes: Type-Ia (SNe Ia); Type-II (SNe II); and
Type-Ib and Type-Ic (collectively SNe Ib/c). SNe Ia, signposts for the thermonuclear detonations of carbon-oxygen
white dwarfs, are defined by the early presence of strong Si II
features. SNe II, the explosions of young, massive stars (with
a Zero-Age-Main-Sequence mass of 𝑀ZAMS > 8 𝑀⊙ ) following core collapse, are events whose spectra exhibit strong
hydrogen lines with P-Cygni profiles. The less-common
SNe Ib/c (comprising, together with the transitional SNe IIb,
∼30% of all core-collapse events; Shivvers et al. 2017) exhibit spectra devoid of both hydrogen and Si II features; these
events result from the core-collapse of young stars that have
undergone envelope stripping.
Corresponding author: Alex Gagliano
gaglian2@illinois.edu
Despite together comprising the vast majority of observed
terminal explosions, SNe Ia, II, and Ib/c remain poorly understood in both their detonation mechanisms and the physics
driving their observed diversity (Laplace et al. 2021). SNe Ia
are likely triggered by either the runaway burning of an accreting white dwarf pushed beyond the Chandrasekhar limit
by a close-in massive companion (with significant uncertainty
surrounding the nature of the companion; see Hachisu et al.
1999), or the merger of two white dwarfs (Pakmor et al.
2012). Significant heterogeneity exists among SNe II in both
their photometric evolution (Arcavi et al. 2012) and spectroscopic characterization (Taddia et al. 2013) that has yet to be
connected definitively to the nature or pre-explosion behavior of their progenitors. Stripped-envelope SN (SN Ib/c/IIb)
progenitors likely arise preferentially in binaries with some
degree of mass transfer (Podsiadlowski et al. 1992), although
some are believed to lose their envelopes in isolation through
eruptive mass-loss and metallicity-driven stellar winds (Kuncarayakti et al. 2018). Further, observations have been unable
to clarify whether SNe Ib, whose spectra contain clear helium
signatures, and SNe Ic, whose spectra lack them, arise from
=== PAGE 2 ===
2
distinct stripping channels or instead reflect extremes along a
continuum in stripping degree.
Although their underlying physics remain unclear, we are
now discovering these transients in abundance. Time-domain
surveys, in an attempt to balance sky coverage and depth, can
be broadly distinguished between those that are low-redshift
and wide-field, such as the Nearby SN Factory (SNFactory;
Aldering et al. 2002), the Texas SN Search (Quimby 2006),
the Pan-STARRS Survey for Transients (PSST; Huber et al.
2015), the All-Sky Automated Survey for SNe (ASAS-SN;
Kochanek et al. 2017), the Asteroid Terrestrial-impact Last
Alert System (ATLAS; Tonry et al. 2018), the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF; Bellm et al. 2019), and the Young SN Experiment (YSE; Jones et al. 2021); and those that are targeted,
high-redshift, and narrow-field, including the Sloan Digital
Sky Survey-II SN Survey (Sako et al. 2008), SN Cosmology
project (Perlmutter et al. 1999), Deep Lens Survey (Becker
et al. 2004), and the Pan-STARRS Medium Deep survey
(MDS; Villar et al. 2019); among others. These complementary searches have contributed to an exponentially-increasing
(O(104 yr −1 )) SN discovery rate. The Vera Rubin Observatory (Vera Rubin Obs; Ivezić et al. 2019), with its synoptic
coverage (completely covering the Southern sky each 3 − 4
days in its Wide-Fast-Deep mode) and its unprecedented survey depths (𝑟 ∼ 24.5 in a single visit), is slated to annually
discovery 106 transients1, single-handedly surpassing the current exponential scaling of SN discovery.
SNe occur at the interface between a dying progenitor star
and its post-explosion remnant. While we are unable to witness the exact moment of this metamorphosis, at best we
can deepen our understanding by tightening our observations
in both temporal directions: in other words, by observing
and connecting the final moments of the progenitor star’s life
and the earliest moments of its destruction. Following this
approach, recent high-cadence imaging has revealed multiple serendipitous detections of pre-cursor emission in the
weeks to months preceding the explosions of core-collapse
SNe (e.g., 2009ip, 2010mc, 2020tlf; Mauerhan et al. 2013,
Ofek et al. 2013, and Jacobson-Galán et al. 2022, respectively). The depth of LSST imaging offers a promising avenue for detecting progenitor emission at some pre-explosion
phase, but the synoptic coverage of this and other upcoming
surveys comes at the expense of sparse phase coverage of
both any pre-explosion activity and of the terminal explosion.
Our capacity to classify discovered events is further thwarted
by our lack of complementary spectroscopic resources. Data
from LSST and other upcoming surveys must be rapidly augmented by additional follow-up from targeted instruments to
fully characterize the photometric and spectroscopic evolu1 https://www.lsst.org/sites/default/files/docs/sciencebook/SB˙11.pdf
tion of an event and link an explosion to its pre-cursor activity,
particularly at early phases when the physics of an explosion
is most directly encoded onto its light curve.
To consolidate photometrically pure samples, and to facilitate the follow-up of scientifically valuable events, light
curve classifiers have appeared on the scene en masse. Some
of these require matching observed light curves to archival
templates (e.g., Sako et al. 2011); others classify on features extracted from light curves (either properties of the
rise, peak, and decline as estimated with parametric fits, or
reduced-dimensionality representations of the full light curve;
see Lochner et al. 2016 and Villar et al. 2019 for reviews of
multiple popular techniques). Several of these algorithms are
founded upon principles directly relevant to solving the earlytime classification problem. These principles include: speed,
with 15M light curve classifications per second processed
with the neural network SuperNNova (Möller & de Boissière
2020); flexibility, with the auto-encoder and recurrent neural
network SuperRAENN (Villar et al. 2020b) able to develop
realistic light curve representations for classification without
complete phase coverage; and adaptive prediction, first shown
as a proof-of-concept by Muthukrishna et al. (2019) with their
recurrent network RAPID and more recently extended to more
sophisticated network architectures in Qu & Sako (2022) and
Pimentel et al. (2022).
Despite these early successes, real-time transient classification remains in its infancy. Success in practice has been
limited by two factors. First, to satiate the data-starved machine learning classifiers currently in use, it has become
standard practice to generate and train on a large sample
of synthetic light curves. Due to our limited understanding
of the underlying physical systems involved, these transient
models are driven by observed phenomenology, and so are
necessarily simplified. This limits the performance of these
classifiers on observed samples, particularly those containing
out-of-distribution behavior. Second, the question of earlytime classification has to date been explored post-hoc through
modifications to networks originally developed for full-phase
classification. A classifier has yet to be designed explicitly
to classify early and to bridge the divide spanning simulation
and observation.
The insights to be gleaned from high-cadence early-time
coverage of SNe, even common ones, are vast. Early-time
brightness variations can reveal interactions with a companion star in a binary, a surrounding progenitor envelope, or
circumstellar material shed by the progenitor pre-explosion
(e.g., Kasen 2010; Gezari et al. 2008; Dimitriadis et al. 2019;
Shappee et al. 2019; Gagliano et al. 2022), and comparisons
with analytic models of 56 Ni decay can reveal tantalizing evidence for additional engines powering an explosion (as is
the case for SLSNe-I and, recently, SNe Ic; see Hosseinzadeh et al. 2022 and Afsariardchi et al. 2021, respectively).
=== PAGE 3 ===
3
The evolution of an explosion’s color in the first few days,
as discrete tracers of its underlying spectral energy distribution (SED), can even unveil an asymmetric distribution of
nucleosynthetic products, such as an overabundance of heavy
elements on the surface of the progenitor star (Ni et al. 2022).
Real-time classification will also help enable the discovery of a greater number of rare and rapidly-evolving transients that have eluded discovery within previous surveys.
Serendipitous detections among massive survey streams have
already revealed multiple transients in this region of parameter space, including Rapidly-Evolving Transients (RETs; Pursiainen et al. 2018); Fast Blue Optical Transients (FBOTs;
Perley et al. 2019); and Fast-Evolving Luminous Transients
(FELTs; Rest et al. 2018). Because the emission timescales
of most SNe are determined by the radioactive half-life of
56 Ni, events evolving more rapidly than this hint at distinct
explosion physics and central engines (such as a relativistic
jet that interacts with a cloud of dense circumstellar material,
as with FBOTs; Gottlieb et al. 2022). Increasing our sample
sizes of these events is essential for constructing a complete
picture of stellar death and the nature of the compact remnant
that these doomed systems leave behind.
In this work, we introduce a recurrent neural network designed end-to-end for early classification of explosive transients. In contrast to the rise of deep-learning methods that
introduce complex networks at the expense of model interpretability, our model consists of a single recurrent layer and
leverages physical information about the explosion site to improve early performance. Because of the simplified architecture and the emphasis on classification with incomplete light
curve information, we deem this approach ‘shallow learning’. Our framework extends the initial real-time classification system developed by Muthukrishna et al. (2019) in four
key respects:
1. We implement a temporally-weighted categorical
cross-entropy loss function such that early classification is prioritized over full-phase classification.
2. We adopt a flexible Gaussian Process model parameterized by the correlation between filter passbands and observations in time to realistically interpolate observed
transient photometry.
3. We utilize a two-component training strategy where the
network is first trained on a large sample of simulated
light curves, and then re-trained on a curated subset of
real observations.
Mandel (2013) verified using the Lick Observatory SN Search
sample (Filippenko et al. 2001) that host galaxy morphology
and color could be used to construct photometric SN Ia samples as pure as those constructed using the then-leading light
curve methods. Baldeschi et al. (2020) extended this work
with a random forest classifier to distinguish between low
and highly star-forming host galaxies, finding that this metric
could serve as an indicator of transient type in the two-class
scenario (SNe II versus SNe Ia). A postage-stamp classifier
constructed by Carrasco-Davis et al. (2021) uses a convolutional neural network to distinguish between SNe, asteroids,
variable stars, and bogus alerts with a single detection image
(in the case of SNe, this necessarily includes host galaxy information). Gagliano et al. (2021) found that a random forest
classifier trained directly on the photometric features of transient host galaxies achieved ∼ 70% accuracy distinguishing
between SNe II and SNe Ia. FLEET, a random-forest classifier used to recover SLSNe-I from survey streams, combines
a set of full-phase parametric light curve features with host
galaxy properties and reports 20 SLSN-I discovered per year
with an overall detection purity of 85% (Gomez et al. 2020).
More recent work has extended these insights to additional
sub-classes of SNe (Kisley et al. 2022). None of these methods leverage both host-galaxy and light curve information for
real-time, adaptive photometric classification.
We leverage the photometric information from two surveys
in this work, mimicking the realistic scenario in which heterogeneous data (potentially with observations collected in distinct filter systems) are consolidated from multiple sources.
We consider SN photometry in ZTF-𝑔𝑟 and 𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑦 host-galaxy
photometry from the Pan-STARRS 3-𝜋 survey (Chambers
et al. 2016), both in our simulated and observed samples.
We provide an overview of our analysis, which mimics
the structure of this paper, in Fig. 1. In §2, we introduce
the simulated and observational datasets used in this work.
We outline our prescription for pre-processing each of the
transient light curves in §3, and introduce our recurrent neural
network architecture in §4. We then describe our training
of the model in §5. We provide results from our recurrent
classification tests and place them in the context of light curve
only classification, and of other recently-released photometric
classifiers, in §6. We conclude with a discussion of science
applications and future work in §7.
2. DATA
4. We include photometry from the galaxy where a transient occurred (its ‘host galaxy’) to reduce the reliance
on sparse transient photometry at early phases.
2.1. Simulated Transients and their Host Galaxies
Host galaxy information is increasingly being considered for
its value in early SN classification. The initial work of Foley &
We first outline the pipeline used to generate the primary
training set for our classification network. Our strategy lever-
2.1.1. Modeling Transient Photometry with SNANA
=== PAGE 4 ===
4
Transient
Generation with
SNANA
Phase
Jitter
Galactic
De-Reddening
§3.1
§2.1
Network Training §5
E(B − V )MW
Light Curve
Truncation
(0 < tn < 30)
+
Simulated
Segments
Early Weight
Photo-z
Sampling
§3.3
+
Classification
Results
LSTM
B
A
C
Padding & Gaussian
Process Fitting
BTS
§3.2
Observed
Segments
Weighted
Loss §4.2
§2.2
+
Class Weight
§6
+
Early Weight
Luminosity Normalization
LSTM
Figure 1. Overview of our analysis pipeline, with relevant sections in this paper labeled. Data are outlined in blue, while analysis steps are
given in green.
ages the popular simulation code SNANA2 (Kessler et al. 2009),
which constructs a forward model for a transient event starting
from a rest-frame SED and ending with synthetic observations matching the cadence and depth of a survey of interest.
The simulation considers atmospheric distortions, instrument
efficiency, and photometric calibration in estimating the uncertainty of each simulated observation. A common set of SN
SED models used to train the current generation of photometric classifiers are those constructed for the Photometric LSST
Astronomical Time-Series Classification Challenge (PLAsTiCC; Kessler et al. 2019). Since the challenge was first run,
the models associated with SNe Ia, SNe II, and SNe Ib/c
have all been updated, and will soon be released in an updated iteration of the challenge. We adopt these updated SED
templates for our simulations.
Using SNANA, we simulate the properties of four classes
of SNe: SNe Ia, SNe II, SNe Ib, and SNe Ic. We assume
a flat ΛCDM cosmology with 𝐻0 = 70 km s−1 Mpc−1 , Ω 𝑀
= 0.3, ΩΛ = 0.7, and 𝑤 = −1. To parameterize the rise,
stretch, and color of SNe Ia as a function of their rest-frame
SEDs, we use the recently-released SALT3 model (Kenworthy
et al. 2021), an update of the commonly-used SALT2 model
(Guy et al. 2007). For SNe II, SNe Ib, and SNe Ic, we
use the spectrophotometric templates provided by Vincenzi
et al. (2019). These templates have been constructed from
observed events of multiple sub-types; we consolidate the
templates provided for SNe IIP/IIL, SNe IIn, and SNe IIb as
“SNe II” to reflect the observational diversity of this class.
We generate synthetic light curves in ZTF-𝑔 and ZTF-𝑟
for each transient class over the redshift range 0 < 𝑧 < 0.2
to match the photometric properties of the data publicly re2 https://github.com/RickKessler/SNANA/tree/master
ported in the alert stream of the Zwicky Transient Facility
(ZTF; Bellm et al. 2019)3. Because we aim to apply our
trained network to the ZTF Bright Transient Survey (ZTF
BTS), which is magnitude-limited to ZTF-𝑟 < 18.5 (additional detail on the catalog is provided in §2.2), we cut from
our simulations any transients without at least a single observation brighter than this limit. We also remove observations
with a signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) of less than 4 (determined
empirically to match the S/N distribution of observations reported in the ZTF BTS). The sky locations of transients in
the simulated sample, which convolves a uniform distribution
where they occur with the ZTF footprint where they are detected, are then used to calculate the expected line-of-sight
Galactic extinction assuming 𝑅𝑉 = 3.1, an intrinsic scatter of
𝜎𝐸(𝐵−𝑉) = 0.16, and the dust law from Cardelli et al. (1989).
Because the simulation represents a forward model imposing observational cuts on an underlying ‘true’ transient sample, the final number of transients ‘observed’ is unknown a
priori. We simulate 50,000 events of each class so that at least
20,000 remain after these cuts. Once we have a dataset of ‘observed’ ZTF SNe, we combine SNe Ib and SNe Ic into a single
“SN Ib/c” class (due to the uncertainty surrounding their classification as distinct sub-types) and under-sample the dominant classes with the Python package imbalanced-learn
(Lemaı̂tre et al. 2017) so that the full dataset has the same
number of events per class. This results in a sample containing 20,000 ZTF light curves per transient class (SN Ia, SN II,
and SN Ib/c), or 60,000 in total.
We have simulated our transients using 10 Intel Xeon
“Haswell” processor nodes on the Cray XC40 “Cori” system at the National Energy Research Scientific Computing
3 http://ztf.caltech.edu
=== PAGE 5 ===
5
(NERSC). The full simulation took a total wall time of 5.2
hours.
2.1.2. Simulated Host-Galaxy Properties with Normalizing Flows
Our goal is to leverage host-galaxy properties to predict a
transient’s class when explosion photometry is limited and
spectroscopy is absent. Our neural network needs to be
trained on data comprising only what is available at test-time,
and should be informed by extant SN samples.
Significant effort has been devoted to expanding the SNANA
simulation code to simultaneously model samples of observed
transients and their host galaxies (Brout et al. 2019; Vincenzi et al. 2021; Lokken et al. 2022); however, this approach
has several limitations for our use case. First, the generation of realistic photometric redshifts demands that both the
survey-specific photometry and colors of synthetic galaxies
be well-calibrated against observations (a non-trivial problem; Korytov et al. 2019). Second, we wish to generate a
large, balanced training sample spanning the same redshift
range as the test set. This would likely require scaling up
the number of low-redshift galaxies in existing synthetic or
observed catalogs, which can introduce artificial structure if
properties are repeated. Finally, as ZTF photometry does
not exist for galaxies, our framework needs to match SNe
observed in one survey to galaxies observed in another.
We bypass these limitations by proposing a simple datadriven model trained to reproduce the class-specific photometric properties (PS1-𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑦 and photometric redshift) of
observed SN host galaxies. By conditioning these properties
on the true redshifts of our generated transients, we can ensure that the host galaxy properties are consistent with the
redshift range simulated without repeating values or demanding that they be observed in the same survey. To this end,
we train separate conditional normalizing flows for the hostgalaxy properties of each transient class in our sample (SN Ia,
SN Ib/c, and SN II).
Normalizing flows (Jimenez Rezende & Mohamed 2015)
are generative models constructed to approximate and draw
from a joint probability density function (PDF) associated
with a complex multi-dimensional dataset. They are parameterized by an invertible bijective function (or bijector) that
maps a simple distribution (e.g., a multi-dimensional Uniform
distribution) to the observed data distribution. New samples
can then be drawn from the data distribution by sampling the
simple distribution and applying the learned bijective function. A flow can also be constructed to predict multiple
parameters of the dataset conditioned on a separate parameter, as is done here. When trained on observed events, this
approach allows us to generate realistic host-galaxy properties without an underlying galaxy model or an encoding of
the observing systematics limiting their identification. We
use the PZFlow4 package (Crenshaw et al. 2022) to build our
conditional normalizing flow.
We first consolidate PS1 best-fit Kron magnitudes in PanSTARRS 𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑦-passbands for the galaxies within the GHOST
(Gagliano et al. 2021) catalog. After excluding events from
the ZTF BTS sample (described in the following section),
those without spectroscopic redshift information, and those
without complete PS1-𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑦 photometry, we are left with
∼ 8, 000 events. The PS1 photometry for each galaxy is corrected for Galactic extinction using the total reddening values at each location derived from Planck observations of the
cosmic microwave background (Planck Collaboration et al.
2014). We further consolidate photometric redshifts for each
host galaxy from the neural-network-produced ‘PS1-STRM’
catalog (Beck et al. 2021), and separate ‘SNe Ia’, ’SNe II’,
and ‘SNe Ib/c’ hosts.
We then train a conditional flow to generate extinctioncorrected PS1-𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑦 photometry and photometric redshifts
for each transient type given the transient’s spectroscopic redshift. Our bijective function is a Rational-Quadratic Neural
Spline Coupling (Durkan et al. 2019), and our target distribution is a multi-dimensional Uniform distribution. We train for
100 epochs and confirm convergence of the log-probability.
We then condition our learned flow on the spectroscopic redshift of each SNANA-simulated transient to generate a posterior
PDF for its host galaxy properties: 𝑝(𝑔, 𝑟, 𝑖, 𝑧, 𝑦, 𝑧phot |𝑧spec ).
We draw from this joint PDF to simultaneously generate point
estimates for each of these properties. We note that uncertainties for these properties can be estimated by repeatedly
drawing from this conditional flow, or the full posterior can
be used instead; for this work we limit ourselves to the single
estimate of each property.
We emphasize that we have not implemented any hostgalaxy association technique, as no positional information
exists: our simulated hosts are fully described by the properties we have generated with the normalizing flow. In practice, SNe observed within 𝑧 < 0.6 may be misassociated at
the 3-5% level using traditional techniques (Gagliano et al.
2021); reproducing this contamination rate using simulations
requires an all-sky galaxy catalog with realistic number densities, far beyond the scope of this work. Because this contamination induces additional scatter in the observed hostgalaxy correlations for each SN class, our normalizing flow
trained on observations naturally encodes the effects of these
misassociations in our simulated galaxy photometry (though
misassociations are less likely within our considered redshift
range of 𝑧 < 0.2).
Next, we divide our simulated sample into training and test
sets comprising 75% and 25% of the original dataset, respec4 https://github.com/jfcrenshaw/pzflow
=== PAGE 6 ===
6
tively. We maintain the even class balance in the training set;
however, we re-balance the test set to have the approximate
class proportions as exist in the ZTF BTS after quality cuts:
80% SNe Ia, 15% SNe II, and 5% SNe Ib/c (where we assume equal proportions of SNe Ib and SNe Ic in the combined
SN Ib/c class). This allows us to track the performance of
the network on a BTS-like sample of events as it trains. We
achieve these proportions by undersampling our SN II and
SN Ib/c light curves using imbalanced-learn. Our final
simulated training set contains 10,000 events of each class,
while our simulated test set contains 8,000 SNe Ia, 1,500
SNe II, and 500 SNe Ib/c.
2.2. Observed Transients from The ZTF Bright Transient
Survey (ZTF BTS)
To evaluate the performance of our network on real observations, we use the set of 4,020 high-quality5 SNe from the ZTF
BTS6 (Fremling et al. 2020; Perley et al. 2020), the largest
spectroscopic sample of SNe constructed to date. Data from
the ZTF public stream are collected using the 47 deg2 fieldof-view camera mounted atop the Palomar 48-inch Schmidt
telescope, which observes in three passbands: ZTF-𝑔, ZTF𝑟, and ZTF-𝑖. The data collected, which now include forced
photometry at the locations of identified events (Masci et al.
2019), are then processed at the Infrared Processing and Analysis Center (IPAC) to produce public alerts ∼4 minutes from
the time of observation. Now in the second phase of its public survey, which comprises half of its total time on-sky, ZTF
scans the entire northern sky with a cadence of ∼2 nights in
ZTF-𝑔 and ZTF-𝑟.
The ZTF BTS is magnitude-limited to ZTF-𝑟 < 18.5 and
nearly spectroscopically-complete, containing spectroscopic
classifications for 93% of discovered SNe. The catalog (at
the time of download on March 16th, 2023) consists of 3,275
SNe Ia, 563 SNe II, and 182 SNe Ib/c, whose photometry
was released to alert brokers in near real-time and whose
spectra were made public on the Transient Name Server7
within a day of observation. The catalog also contains multiple events belonging to rarer classes (including SLSNe-I); we
do not consider these additional classes in this study, but note
that significant host-galaxy correlations have been identified
among these other classes (Lokken et al. 2022) and our model
can easily be extended to include them.
We identify the most likely host galaxies of these transients
in Pan-STARRS (PS1) using the modified directional lightradius (Gupta et al. 2016) method implemented in the GHOST
5 See https://sites.astro.caltech.edu/ztf/bts/explorer info.html for a description of quality and purity cuts.
6 https://sites.astro.caltech.edu/ztf/bts/bts.php
7 https://www.wis-tns.org
(Gagliano et al. 2021) software8. The host galaxies of 866
SNe could not be found using this method and were dropped.
Through visual inspection, another 76 were found to have
erroneous or ambiguous associations and were manually reassociated.
For the identified hosts, PS1 best-fit Kron magnitudes
in 𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑦-passbands were retrieved. 301 systems had unreported host galaxy photometry in at least one PS1 band
and were dropped at this stage, leaving 2,853 events. We
then downloaded the photometry of these transients using the
ANTARES alert broker local client9 (Matheson et al. 2021).
Photometry for 2 transients could not be found and these
events were removed.
Extensive prior work has been done to construct and validate photometric redshift estimators for specific surveys and
galaxy datasets. Due to the lack of generalizability of these
methods, many surveys report neural-network generated photometric redshifts for each galaxy but not the associated code
used to generate them. To bypass this issue, we have constructed a simple emulator for the photometric redshifts reported in Beck et al. (2021) for transient host galaxies. This
allows us to recover redshifts with comparable statistical properties to those predicted by fine-tuned models.
Similar to the approach for the simulated sample, we train
a conditional flow to generate data with comparable statistical properties to our observed sample. Whereas our previous
flow was used to generate both host-galaxy photometry and
photometric redshifts for the simulated sample, this model
leverages observed host-galaxy photometry to predict only
the Beck et al. (2021)-reported photometric redshifts. We
condition our flow on PS1-𝑟 and the colors of galaxies within
the GHOST (Gagliano et al. 2021) sample, which correlate
more strongly with redshift than galaxy brightness alone. As
a result, our normalizing flow predicts the conditional distribution 𝑝(𝑧phot |𝑟, 𝑔 − 𝑟, 𝑟 − 𝑖, 𝑖 − 𝑧, 𝑧 − 𝑦). As before, we
train the flow for 100 epochs and verify convergence of the
log-probability.
After training, we apply our normalizing flow to our ZTF
BTS host galaxy photometry to recover photometric redshift
point estimates. We use these values to normalize our light
curves as described in the following section. We similarly use
the PS1 zero-points and photometric redshifts to convert the
host galaxy apparent magnitudes to host galaxy luminosities,
which we normalize to near unity.
We plot the distribution of photometric redshifts for both
the simulated and observed samples as a function of their
spectroscopic redshifts in Fig. 2. Qualitatively, the scatter
in photometric redshifts between the two samples is similar.
8 https://pypi.org/project/astro-ghost/
9 https://nsf-noirlab.gitlab.io/csdc/antares/client/installation.html
=== PAGE 7 ===
7
Processing Cut
SNe Remaining
Fraction Cut
Initial Sample
Missing/Incorrect Host
Unreported Host Phot.
SN Light Curve Retrieval
Light Curve Truncation
Final SN Sample
4,020
3,154
2,853
2,851
2,807
2,807
–
21.5%
9.6%
< 0.1%
1.5%
30.2%
Table 1. Number of SNe from the ZTF BTS remaining, and fraction
removed, after each step in the processing pipeline.
Figure 2. Photometric versus spectroscopic redshifts for the galaxies in our simulated and observed samples. ZTF BTS host galaxies
are shown as black points, and synthetic host galaxies are shown
as the two-dimensional histogram in blue. The discreteness in observed spectroscopic redshifts is an artifact of the template-matching
algorithm through which they were determined.
Quantitatively, we can measure the number of photometric
redshift outliers as (Hildebrandt et al. 2010)
|𝑧 phot − 𝑧spec |
> 0.15
1 + 𝑧spec
(1)
By this metric, we measure an outlier fraction of 4.5% for the
observed sample and 1.5% for the simulated sample (compared to 2.5% for the Beck et al. (2021)-reported photometric
redshifts for the GHOST training sample).
We note that the use of 𝑢-band photometry from the Sloan
Digital Sky Survey (SDSS; York et al. 2000) would likely
decrease this scatter, but the increased depth of PS1 results
in higher-S/N host-galaxy photometry for use in our network.
Further, redshift is a key feature used to estimate the absolute brightness of an explosion, and therefore a key discriminator between SNe Ia and core-collapse events. The
reliability of photometric redshifts in the era of the Vera
C. Rubin Observatory is an area of active research, and we
avoid fine-tuning these estimates further so as not to report
overly-optimistic performance. Our approach represents a
significant advancement over previous light curve simulations that estimate photo-zs by interpolating look-up tables of
host galaxy colors (see e.g., Graham et al. 2018).
Our observed sample before pre-processing contains 2,851
SNe. An additional 44 were dropped during the light curve
truncation stage described in §3, leaving us with a final observed sample size of 2,807 SNe. While this is a fraction of
the initial number in the ZTF BTS (∼70%), we note that only
a small fraction of the discovered SNe in upcoming surveys
will be classified and selected for follow-up observations. By
constructing a curated observational dataset, we optimize our
classifier’s ability to discover events for which we will be able
to extract meaningful scientific insights. We compare the
distributions of peak apparent magnitude, redshift, and host
galaxy photometry after each of these preprocessing steps to
ensure that we do not encode an additional observational bias
into our observed sample with these cuts. We summarize our
sample sizes after each of these cuts in Table 1.
We divide our final spectroscopic sample into a 75% training set and a 25% test set without changing the relative proportions of classes. As a result, our spectroscopic training set
consists of 1,704 SNe Ia, 280 SNe II, and 121 SNe Ib/c; our
spectroscopic test set consists of 569 SNe Ia, 95 SNe II, and
38 SNe Ib/c.
3. DATA PRE-PROCESSING
3.1. Phase Jitter of Synthetic Light Curves
In our model, the date at which ZTF ‘discovers’ an SN
(deemed the trigger date, or 𝑇trigger ) is the epoch when a second observation is taken with 𝑆/𝑁 ≥ 5. Because the date
at which a transient is discovered is determined by the combination of a transient’s brightness evolution and the survey
cadence, this date should not be assumed to be either the date
of the start of the explosion or a constant offset relative to it.
Nevertheless, the simplicity of SN simulations may lead a machine learning model to over-train on unrealistic correlations
in the trigger dates of the training set instead of the properties
of the light curve. This will limit its use when applied to data
collected from a survey with more restrictive, or relaxed, trigger criteria. To mitigate this issue, we remove observations
from the first 𝑑 days of each transient light curve, where 𝑑 is
a number randomly sampled from a truncated Normal distribution with 𝑑 ∼ N (𝑇trigger , 0.252 ) and 𝑑 ≥ 𝑇trigger . We then
re-define the trigger date of each event as the epoch of the
first observation in this new truncated light curve. For each
light curve in both the simulated and spectroscopic sample,
we calculate the phase of each observation relative to trigger
in days. We correct these phases for time dilation using the
photometric redshifts calculated above and correct light curve
flux values for Galactic extinction. We then remove observations from each light curve obtained greater than 30 days
after this new trigger date (as we are interested in this work in
=== PAGE 8 ===
8
SNIa
91,938
Simulated Sample
Train
Test
(10,000)
SNIbc
93,482
SNII
95,236
280,656
92,663
(10,000)
(30,000)
(10,000)
SNII
14,169 (1,500)
SNIbc
4,831 (500)
SNIa
73,663
(8,000)
(10,000)
SNIbc
1,757 (121)
SNIa
30,497
(1,704)
SNII
4,631 (280)
36,885
(2,105)
12,058
(702)
SNIa
9,786
SNII
1,750 (95)
SNIbc
522 (38)
(569)
Observed (Spec.) Sample
Figure 3. The training and testing datasets used in this work. Above: The composition of simulated events used in phase 1 of training the
network. The total number of light curve segments in each sample are listed, and the number of unique transient events in each sample are given
in parentheses. Below: The composition of spectroscopic events from the ZTF Bright Transient Survey used in the re-training stage (see text
for details).
early classification). We do not k-correct our photometry, as
this would encode assumptions about the shape of the SED
of each transient class (and further encode the reliance on
accurately determined redshifts).
Our classifier consists of a recurrent neural network, and
these networks were initially constructed to process arrays
of uniform length. To prepare irregularly-sampled light
curves across multiple passbands for processing, common
approaches include padding light curves to a fixed length and
masking zero-valued observations in training (e.g., Charnock
& Moss 2017); or interpolating observations onto a grid of
uniform length (e.g., Villar et al. 2020b). We adopt both approaches, using a Gaussian Process model described in the
following section.
3.2. Gaussian Process Interpolation and Padding
We use Gaussian Process Regression (GPR; Rasmussen
2006) to construct a light curve model for each transient event
and interpolate observations in apparent magnitudes onto an
evenly-spaced grid in time. In GPR, observations are considered to be realizations of a latent function with Gaussian
noise. A function describing the covariance between observations, called the kernel, is constructed and its parameters
are chosen to minimize the loss function (and maximize the
likelihood of the obtained observations). This results in a
continuous posterior distribution for a class of models that
describe the data. GPR can additionally consider a mean
model for the observations, and this further conditions the
subsequent model predictions.
Our model, which is implemented in the lightweight code
tinygp10, uses a Matérn kernel with 𝜈 = 3/2 that quantifies
the correlation in time between observations 𝑡 𝑖 and 𝑡 𝑗 as
√
√
𝑘(𝑡𝑖 , 𝑡 𝑗 ) = (1 + 3𝑟)𝑒 − 3𝑟
𝑡 −𝑡
(2)
In the above equation, 𝑟 = || 𝑖 𝑙 𝑗 || 1 parameterizes the time
between observations and the scale factor 𝑙 is a free parameter. In addition to modeling the correlation between singleband observations in time, we model the correlations between
bands. We construct a 𝑝 × 𝑝 symmetric correlation matrix,
where in this case 𝑝 = 2 is the number of passbands considered. The diagonal and off-diagonal terms (2 and 1 terms,
respectively) are free parameters to be fit.
We use a constant value in each band as our mean model
(𝑔,
¯ 𝑟),
¯ and add the uncertainty in each band to the diagonal
of the covariance matrix along with additional free terms 𝑗 𝑔 ,
𝑗𝑟 to capture any remaining measurement error. In total,
our model consists of 8 free parameters. We transform our
data from flux to magnitude space and minimize the negative
marginal log probability of the model (our loss function) to
determine the best-fit parameters for each event. We optimize
our Gaussian Process fit with the Scipy package.
There is precedent to a Gaussian Process (GP) light
curve model parameterized by the correlation in both wavelength/frequency and time. A similar method was first in10 https://tinygp.readthedocs.io/en/stable/
=== PAGE 9 ===
9
troduced by Boone (2019) with the photometric classifier
Avocado, the winning submission of the Photometric LSST
Astronomical Time-Series Classification Challenge (PLAsTiCC; Kessler et al. 2019). In Avocado, the central wavelength of each passband was used as the coordinates of the
wavelength dimension of the GP. Villar et al. (2020a) also
used a custom GP model described by a kernel in both wavelength and time, where the distance metric in wavelength
space was the Wasserstein-1 distance between each filter’s
normalized throughput. Because these two GP methods place
physical constraints on the covariance in wavelength, they are
specialized cases of our model. A physically-motivated construction of the GP covariance matrix may be desirable when
photometry is sparse; however, in this work we opt instead for
a model with greater flexibility to fully characterize both the
long-duration and short-duration behavior of each transient.
We show the best-fit GP model for one simulated transient
event across three phases of its light curve, in additional to
the best-fit passband kernel at that phase, in Fig. 4. With
few observations, minimal correlation is detected between
passbands (left plot). As more data is obtained (middle and
right plots), the correlation increases and is used to improve
the posterior light curve fits across both passbands. This
learned correlation also ensures that the model in each band
is robust against low-S/N observations (not shown).
Although a GP model whose hyperparameters are optimized based on a full-phase light curve would best characterize an event’s evolution in time and across passbands, this
information will not be available in real-time. We decompose
each transient light curve into segments to realistically simulate constructing a model at different phases of observation.
From a light curve with 𝑁 total observations in the simulated
sample, we construct a series of 𝑁/2 segments from the first 𝑛
observations, where 𝑛 = 2, 4...𝑁. In other words, we generate
a unique segment every two observations of the light curve.
This cadence was chosen to reduce the volumes of training
data without decreasing the number of transient events they
contain (and the associated photometric diversity).
Multiple strategies have been proposed to pre-process
unevenly-sampled and multi-variate time-series datasets for
use in recurrent neural networks, and it remains unclear which
strategy yields the best performance for SN classification.
With this in mind, we construct three different data representations of our light segments:
1. Raw and Pad Model: In the first approach, we construct an array directly from the light curve observations. This photometry has been corrected for distance, extinction, and time dilation but has not been
interpolated using our GP model. In this method, our
temporal array contains the (jittered) phases at which
observations were obtained in any band; the magnitude
and magnitude uncertainty arrays are filled with ze-
ros where a given band was unobserved. These arrays
are then padded with zeros at the tail end so that the
matrices for all events have equal length.
2. 100-Timestep Model: In the second approach, we construct a GP fit for each light curve segment and compute
the mean and standard deviation of the GP posterior distribution at 100 independently-spaced phases spanning
the full extent of the segment. We then convert these
interpolated observations and their uncertainties from
magnitude space back to flux space. We note that, in
contrast to prior light curve methods, this interpolation scheme does not maintain uniform spacing in time
across light curve segments. One partial-phase segment may consist of 10 observations spanning 5 days,
in which case it will be interpolated onto a uniform
grid with 𝛿𝑡 = 0.05 days; if 10 additional observations
span another 5 days, the full 10-day segment would be
interpolated onto a grid with 𝛿𝑡 = 0.1 days.
3. 0.2-Day Spacing Model: In the third approach, we
construct a GP fit as above and evaluate the GP model
at phases beginning at the time of trigger and occurring
every 𝛿𝑡 = 0.2 days until the end of the segment. We
then convert these interpolated observations to flux.
While this approach preserves consistent spacing in
time, the interpolated light curves will not be equal in
length. As in method 1, we pad each light curve array
to a consistent length after interpolation.
We have adopted a flexible GP model over a physical light
curve model to capture the observed diversity in SN photometry, which allows unexpected phenomenology to be expressed
in the interpolated data. When an SN is young, however, this
flexibility can be detrimental: with very few observations,
the best-fit GP model may not reflect expected early-time SN
behavior. To bypass this limitation, we only interpolate our
observations after 5 or more total observations have been obtained. Before this phase, we pad the photometry with zeros
to a uniform length in all three of our models and pass these
arrays directly into the neural network (as with our ‘Rad and
Pad’ model above). We note that a more sophisticated approach may be to integrate a physically-motivated light curve
model at early times, then transition to a more flexible GP
model as more data is obtained. We leave this implementation to future work.
After obtaining the interpolated or padded representations
of each light curve segment, we convert its flux to normalized
luminosity using the equation
𝐿 Norm =
4𝜋𝑑 2 𝐹
𝛼
(3)
where 𝐹 is the GP-interpolated flux in each band; 𝑑 is the
luminosity distance to the transient in parsec, estimated from
=== PAGE 10 ===
10
ZTF-g
ZTF-g
ZTF-g
ZTF-r
ZTF-r
ZTF-r
ZTF-g
ZTF-r
SN II
ZTF-g
ZTF-r
ZTF-g
ZTF-r
ZTF-g
ZTF-r
T − Ttrigger (Days)
T − Ttrigger (Days)
T − Ttrigger (Days)
Figure 4. Best-fit Gaussian Process model for one simulated light curve in ZTF passbands (ZTF-𝑔 in green and ZTF-𝑟 in red) at three phases
in its evolution from the time of trigger (bottom). The best-fit band-wise covariance matrix associated with each fit is shown at top. Because
our model is parameterized by the covariance between observations in both time and wavelength, observations taken in a single band inform the
model in the other.
the photometric redshift of the host galaxy; and 𝛼 = 1023
is a normalization constant used to keep the computed luminosities near unity (as neural network performance is often
better if the input range is constrained). Photometric uncertainties extracted from the GP fit are similarly converted as
𝜎L,Norm = 𝐿 Norm 𝜎𝐹 /𝐹.
Each interpolated or padded transient light curve segment is
represented in our dataset as an 𝑁pad × 𝑝 matrix, where 𝑁pad is
the full length of each light curve segment, including padded
values (this value is different for each of the three methods)
and 𝑝 = 2 is the number of passbands (ZTF-𝑔, 𝑟). To this
matrix, we add the array of interpolated phases 𝑡 = 𝑇 −𝑇trigger ;
the GP-derived photometric uncertainties in each band; and
𝑁pad -length arrays contains the fixed repeated values of
𝐸(𝐵 − 𝑉) 𝑀𝑊 , 𝑧 phot , and host galaxy normalized luminosity
in PS1-𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑦 filters. This results in a data matrix containing
arrays of dimensionality 𝑁pad × (2𝑝 + 8) that are used to both
train and validate the network.
We consolidate our 𝑁pad ×(2𝑝+8) arrays for all SN segments
associated with the SNe in our training samples described in
2.1; this forms our training set. The segment arrays associated
with the test SNe similarly form our test set. Our target array
for prediction is a one-hot encoded representation of our three
classes: SNe II are encoded as ‘0’, SNe Ia as ‘1’, and SNe Ib/c
as ‘2’. We report the number of unique transient events across
the simulated and spectroscopic training and test set, along
with the number of light curve segments in each sample, in
Fig. 3.
4. MODEL ARCHITECTURE
4.1. Overview
To take advantage of the temporal correlations embedded
within our partial-phase time-series samples, we design a
recurrent neural network for photometric classification.
A recurrent neural network (RNN) is comprised of multiple
connected and directed “units” that are trained to learn a data
representation from both the internal states of earlier units as
well as a component of the input array. Because gradients
propagate through the network, RNNs have traditionally suffered from vanishing and exploding gradients (those tending
toward 0 and infinity, respectively) in training. This issue
can be alleviated by the use of recurrent units that modulate
information flow through the network; for example, Gated
Recurrent Units (GRUs; Cho et al. 2014) feature coupled ‘update’ and ‘reset’ gates. We have selected the more conventional Long-Short Term Memory cells (LSTM; Hochreiter
& Schmidhuber 1997) as our RNN units. LSTMs contain
three gates: a ‘forget’ gate that removes information from the
cell state; an ‘input’ gate that regulates the adding of new
information from the data sequence into the cell state; and
an ‘output’, which regulates the output of the cell state into
a subsequent unit. We use LSTMs for their ability to retain
insights from the long-term behavior of complex time-series
data, where they often achieve superior performance to GRUs
(e.g., Cahuantzi et al. 2021).
The architecture of our neural network is illustrated in
Fig. 5. It consists of a single LSTM layer of 60 units, with a
=== PAGE 11 ===
11
Npad
A common choice for the loss function used to train multiclass classification networks is the sparse categorical crossentropy. For an event belong to true class 𝑎, the categorical
cross-entropy is calculated as
t
SN LZTF−g,r
SN σZTF−g,r
2p + 8
zphot
E(B − V )MW
𝐿(𝑦, 𝑦ˆ ) = −
Host LPS1−grizy
𝑀 ∑︁
𝐶
∑︁
𝑦 𝑖 𝑗 × log 𝑦ˆ 𝑖 𝑗

(5)
𝑗=0 𝑖=0
where 𝐶 is the number of transient classes (in this work
𝐶 = 3), 𝑀 is the number of events in a training batch, 𝑦 𝑖 𝑗 is
the true class of event 𝑗 after one-hot-encoding (with 𝑦 𝑖 𝑗 = 1
where 𝑗 = 𝑎, else 𝑦 𝑖 𝑗 = 0), and 𝑦ˆ 𝑖 𝑗 is the set of predicted
normalized probabilities output from the softmax layer of the
network. The cross-entropy for all events in a given batch are
summed at each training epoch to compute the network loss.
We modify this framework to weight the contributions of
particular segments over others. The modified cross-entropy
loss is constructed as:
Masking
LSTM Layer
(60 Units)
Dense Layer
Softmax
PtN
𝐿(𝑦, 𝑦ˆ ) = −
Figure 5. Architecture for our RNN, which is composed of a single
LSTM layer of 60 units. The photometry in each band (interpolated,
padded, or both) is stacked with the photometric redshift, extinction,
and host galaxy photometry, which are repeated at each phase. This
combined array serves as the input to our RNN, and the network
returns a single classification prediction corresponding to the light
curve segment processed.
sigmoid activation function defined as
1
𝑆(𝑥) =
1 + 𝑒 −𝑥
(4)
where 𝑥 is the input tensor to the gate. The next layer is
a masking layer, which constructs a boolean mask of equal
dimensionality to the input data. This mask, which is propagated through successive layers along with the data, is constructed to flag and ignore padded values in training. This
layer is followed by a dense layer to consolidate model outputs
into a set of normalized probability scores corresponding to
the likelihood of the light curve to belong to the three transient
classes considered (SN Ia, SN II, SN Ib/c).
Many previous RNN architectures for photometric classification have applied dropout layers that deactivate randomlyselected neurons during training to ensure that all neurons
are used; batch normalization is also common to decrease the
number of training epochs needed to achieve accurate classification results. We have found that neither modification
significantly increases the accuracy of our model when applied to real data, and so have excluded them. Our network
is implemented in TensorFlow (Abadi et al. 2015) using the
Keras (Chollet et al. 2015) interface.
4.2. Class-Weighted Loss For Accurate Early Predictions
𝑀 ∑︁
𝐶
∑︁
𝛽𝑖 𝑗 𝑦 𝑖 𝑗 × log 𝑦ˆ 𝑖 𝑗

(6)
𝑗=0 𝑖=0
We calculate the weight of each light curve segment as a function of 𝑡 𝑁 , the final phase covered by the segment (ignoring
padded values):


10,




𝛽𝑖 𝑗 (𝑡 𝑁 ) = 5,



 1,

for 𝑡 𝑁 ≤ 3 days
for 𝑡 𝑁 > 3 days and 𝑡 𝑁 ≤ 15 days (7)
otherwise
These weights are constructed so that the network minimizes
the loss by prioritizing the classification of SNe using only
photometry provided in the first three days following detection. In the re-training stage using observed ZTF light curves
(see §5 for details), we modulate these values by an additional
weight according to the class of the transient associated with
the segment:


𝛽𝑖 𝑗 (𝑡 𝑁 ) × 2,




𝛽𝑖 𝑗 (𝑡 𝑁 ) = 𝛽𝑖 𝑗 (𝑡 𝑁 ) × 1,



 𝛽 (𝑡 ) × 5,
 𝑖𝑗 𝑁
for 𝑗 = 0
for 𝑗 = 1
(8)
for 𝑗 = 2
The multiplicative factors are added to make the network
more sensitive to identifying SNe II and SNe Ib/c, which
are poorly represented in our re-training dataset. SNe II
events are more photometrically heterogeneous than SNe Ia,
and SNe Ib/c are more easily confused with SNe Ia; the
network learns to classify these more challenging minority
classes only through explicit weighting. We note that we
have tested the performance of the network after using these
class weights in the primary training stage (on synthetic data
before re-training). We find no significant improvement in
=== PAGE 12 ===
12
performance relative to the early-weighted cross-entropy loss.
The same principle we have applied here can be used to adapt
publicly-available classifiers for specific science cases (e.g., to
prioritize SN Ia classification for cosmological studies, or to
prioritize late classification for nebular-phase spectroscopic
follow-up).
5. PRIMARY AND ADAPTIVE TRAINING
Because of the inherent complexity of observational data,
classification models trained on simulated data typically
under-perform on more realistic datasets. We have attempted
to reduce the discrepancy between synthetic and observed
samples by simulating realistic photometric redshifts and jittering the early photometry of simulated light curves. We
further prepare our trained network for real-time operation
with a domain-adaptation step in the training process. There
are two primary motivations for this:
• Encoding a weak dependence on class imbalance
and survey systematics: If the network was fully
trained using realistic relative class rates, it may prioritize accurate classification of some classes over
others (e.g., only classifying SNe Ia, the most common SN class in observed samples); conversely, a network trained on evenly balanced datasets may predict
unrealistically-large numbers of minority classes. A retraining stage allows a reasonably flexible architecture
to consider both pieces of information. After learning
the underlying phenomenological differences between
the light curves of each SN class from the balanced
simulated sample, the network in its re-training stage
additionally considers the observed distribution of real
events in a given survey.
• Increasing the Realism of Estimated Photo-𝑧s:
Given the reliance of photometric classifiers on the
predicted distance to the transient, it is imperative that
our model is trained on a set of photometric redshifts
with statistical properties comparable to those derived
from observed photometry. While the overall scatter
of the simulated and observed samples appears similar, re-training prevents the network from relying upon
unphysical artifacts within the simulation for its prediction.
First, we train our network on the simulated training sample for 200 epochs. We use the stochastic gradient descent
optimizer Adam (Kingma & Ba 2014), with a learning rate
of 𝑙 = 10−4 . We then re-train this model for 200 additional
epochs and the same learning rate on the observed training
sample. The temporal weights used in both training stages
are identical; however, we have only used the class weights in
the re-training stage, to account for the class imbalance. We
use a training batch size of 32 in the simulated training stage
and 12 in the spectroscopic training stage to account for the
smaller data volumes of the latter dataset. We conducted the
primary and secondary training for each of the three models
across 24 CPUs of a node of the Flatiron Institute Scientific
Computing Hub. The primary training stage was completed
in a wall time of 31.2 - 32.1 hours per model, while the secondary training stage was conducted in 9.7 - 11.6 hours of
wall time per model.
6. RESULTS
In the following section, we evaluate the performance of
our three models as a function of phase. We construct ROC
curves and PRC curves for each model, and report balanced
metrics across the SN classes in our sample.
6.1. Receiver Operator Characteristic and Precision-Recall
Curves
For both the simulated and the observed samples, we bin
our light curve segments into early (𝑡 𝑁 < 3 days), intermediate (3 < 𝑡 𝑁 < 15 days), and late (15 > 𝑡 𝑁 > 30 days) epochs
depending on the phase of the final observation in the segment. The vast majority of events within the ‘early’ bin will
still be brightening, while the late events will predominantly
be dimming after peak.
For a given phase bin, events correctly classified as belonging to a class 𝑎 are called True Positives (𝑇 𝑃). Events
incorrectly classified as belonging to class 𝑎 are called False
Positives (𝐹𝑃). Conversely, events correctly and incorrectly
classified as not belonging to class 𝑎 are deemed True Negatives (𝑇 𝑁) and False Negatives (𝐹 𝑁), respectively. Then, the
classification precision, also known as its purity, is calculated
as
𝑇 𝑃𝑎
𝑝𝑎 =
(9)
𝑇 𝑃 𝑎 + 𝐹𝑃 𝑎
The classification recall, also known as its completeness, is
calculated by
𝑇 𝑃𝑎
𝑟𝑎 =
(10)
𝑇 𝑃𝑎 + 𝐹 𝑁𝑎
A common method to evaluate the performance of a binary
classifier is to consider the false positive rate 𝐹𝑃 𝑎 as a function of the true positive rate 𝑇 𝑃 𝑎 ; a well-trained classifier
should be able to maximally increase the rate at which they
recover events from class 𝑎 while minimizing the rate at which
they mistakenly identify the alternative class as belonging to
class 𝑎. The ideal behavior of this 𝑇 𝑃 − 𝐹𝑃 curve, also known
as a Receiver Operator Characteristic Curve (ROC; Peterson
et al. 1954), is to rapidly increase toward a true positive rate of
unity with minimal false positives. We quantify this behavior
by calculating the Area Under the ROC (AUROC; Pepe et al.
2006), which is unity in the limit of perfect classification and
0.5 in the case of random guessing.
Another common metric is to plot the recall of the model
as a function of its precision; a well-performing classifier
=== PAGE 13 ===
13
exhibits a Precision-Recall (PR) curve with high recall rates
(the fraction of recovered events from class 𝑎) even as the demanded model precision increases. As in the ROC curve, this
trade-off can be quantified by the area under the precisionrecall curve (AUPRC; Saito & Rehmsmeier 2015), with
AUPRC = 1 for perfect classification and AUC = 𝑓 𝑎 , the
fraction of the test data consisting of class 𝑎, for random
guessing. The AUROC and the AUPRC provide complementary views of a classifier’s performance.
Our work is motivated by the need for rapid characterization
of common events to conduct follow-up with highly limited
resources. We will be unable to study the vast majority of
discovered transient events in detail, but we must ensure that
we do not waste precious resources when we do. For this
reason, this and other upcoming SN classifiers will need to
optimize a method’s precision over its recall. We note that if
an event is intrinsically rare, a classifier’s recall rate may be
prioritized over its precision.
We use the StratifiedKFold module in sklearn to
generate five evenly-sized random splits of the test datasets.
These data subsets are mutually exclusive: no events are repeated between them. Next, we binarize our classification
predictions for each split using the one-versus-all approach
(in which the true class 𝑎 is assigned a value of 1 and the
other two classes are assigned a value of 0). We then generate
ROC and PR Curves for each data split and each phase range
(‘early’, ‘intermediate’, and ‘late’). Finally, we calculate the
mean and standard deviation of the curves across all splits.
The ROC and PR curves for the ‘Raw with Pad’, ‘100Timestep GP’, and ‘0.2-Day GP’ models are shown in Figures
6, 7, and 8, respectively. We show these curves applied to
both the simulated test segments after the first training stage
and on the observed test segments after the retraining stage.
We report the class-specific AUC and AUPRC values in the
figure legends.
On the simulated sample, we achieve near-perfect classification for both SNe II and SNe Ia at late phases (15 < 𝑡 𝑁 <
30): Our mean AUROC values for the two classes are ≥ 98%
across all three models, and the mean AUPRC values are
≥ 95%. We observe substantially worse results at late phases
for SNe Ib/c: in the worst case, we observe an AUROC of
94 ± 1% for the 100-Timestep GP model but an associated
AUPRC of 54 ± 11%. We attribute this to the class imbalance of the test set, to which the the AUPRC is particularly
sensitive: ∼ 5% of the sample is SN Ib/c.
At late phases, we also observe the largest difference between the three classifiers tested on the simulated transients.
Despite generally comparable performance for all models, we
find the lowest metrics with the 100-Timestep GP model, with
AUPRC values of 99 ± < 1%, 95 ± 1%, and 54 ± 11% for
SNe Ia, SNe II, and SNe Ib/c, respectively. It is possible that
this is a reflection of the loss of physically-relevant timescales
in pre-processing these light curves: because 100 observations are generated independent of the duration of the light
curve segment, the same rise and decline times could comprise half of one processed array and span the full extent of
another. Although we also pass the phase information explicitly to the network, we propose that the physically-motivated
spacing between array elements aids the network in learning
the temporal evolution of an event. Further, we note that the
first five observations were passed in directly (without interpolation) for each of the models. Because ZTF observations
are taken with a median cadence of ∼2 days, these observations encode physical information about the phase of the
event in the number of array elements. The network trained
to leverage this information from raw data (the ‘Raw and Pad’
model) is better-adapted to process this early data, evidenced
by the highest early-phase precision for simulated SNe Ib/c
(24 ±1%).
We now consider the performance of our three models on
the spectroscopically-confirmed sample of SNe from the ZTF
BTS. For the dominant class in the sample, SN Ia, we note
surprisingly consistent results when transitioning from simulations to observations: the late-phase classification achieves
an AUROC of 85±4% and an AUPRC of 94±3% in the worst
case (with the ‘Raw and Pad’ model). The performance on
the other two classes is appreciably worse: we observe significantly greater variance among the performance results between the five cross-validation folds for each the three models,
particularly for SNe Ib/c. In the worst case, our mean AUROC metric for late-phase classification decreases by 36% for
SNe Ib/c and 34% for SNe II with the ‘Raw and Pad’ model.
Our AUROC and AUPRC values increase roughly monotonically with phase for each classifier applied to both the simulated and observed SN samples. There is a single exception:
the mean SN Ib/c AUROC decreases from intermediate to
late phase with the ‘Raw and Pad’ model, although the difference is not statistically significant. The ‘0.2-Day GP’ model
achieves marginally superior performance at late-phase, and
we conclude that this representation may be slightly better
able to incorporate the long-term evolution of each light
curve. We note that, in an earlier iteration of this work,
the inclusion of ZTF SNe that did not pass the ZTF-imposed
quality and purity cuts caused this performance increase with
phase to disappear for the the ‘Raw and Pad’ model. The
fact that our simplified network architecture is able to reasonably fit the temporal behavior of the real data across all three
light curve representations suggests that, for sufficient-quality
observations, interpolation onto an evenly-spaced grid (as is
commonplace in present-day photometric classifiers) may not
be a required pre-processing step for accurate RNN classification.
Finally, we find that all three models are able to achieve
classification performance in the first three days better than
=== PAGE 14 ===
14
random guessing across all SN classes. For the ‘0.2-Day
GP’ model, we find mean AUROC values of > 72% across
all classes, and an AUPRC value of 90% for SNe Ia. We
additionally find AUPRC values of 22 ± 7% for SNe Ib/c and
38±2% for SNe II. These are encouraging results that the light
curve rise of an SN, coupled with its host galaxy photometry,
can be used for real-time early classification. Our results also
suggest that the application of machine-learning solutions to
simulated SN samples alone may suggest overly optimistic
performance, and may not be reflective of their performance
on real data.
6.2. Comparison to Light Curve-Only Classification
Next, we quantify the impact of each component of our
classification framework on our final results. Due to the
slightly superior late-time performance of the ‘0.2-Day GP’
model described in the previous section, we use this as our
baseline for comparison.
To facilitate this analysis, we have trained three additional
models using the ‘0.2-Day GP’ interpolation method. In the
first, we remove host-galaxy photometry and consider only the
transient’s light curve, photometric redshift, and the Galactic
extinction along the line of sight. In the second, we remove
our primary training stage, and train our network exclusively
on the imbalanced training set from the ZTF BTS. In the third,
we remove our adaptive training stage and train our network
exclusively on the balanced simulated sample.
To better facilitate a comparison between these models, we
consider the macro-average of the AUROC, AUPRC, precision, and recall between the three classes. These metrics
consider the contributions of each class equally, and consequently are not dominated by the network’s performance on
the most populous class in the observed sample (SN Ia). This
is in contrast to the micro-average, in which a weighted average is computed using the number of events of each class.
Our macro-averaged balanced metrics are denoted with a ‘b-’
prefix. We also introduce an additional metric to our comparison: the balanced-F1 score, defined as the harmonic mean
between the precision and recall of a classifier averaged between classes:
𝐶
1 ∑︁
2𝑟 𝑖 𝑝 𝑖
𝐹1 =
(11)
𝐶 𝑖=0 𝑟 𝑖 + 𝑝 𝑖
The balanced-𝐹1 score consolidates multiple performance
metrics into a single value for directly comparing classifiers.
We report this and our other metrics for the above models
evaluated on the early-phase (< 3 day) light curves of the
observed ZTF BTS sample. We report our results in Table 2.
We find that removing any component of our training sequence decreases the mean value of every metric. The largest
decrease in every metric comes from removing the adaptive
training stage. Interestingly, removing the primary training
stage results in a nearly comparable mean sample accuracy
to our baseline classifier (81% compared to 82%). Removing the adaptive training stage results in a substantial drop in
mean accuracy (66% compared to 82%), although these two
truncated-training networks have comparable precision. This
can be understood in the context of the class breakdown in
each training set: Training only on the fully balanced simulated sample results in inaccurate predictions on a sample
comprised primarily of SNe Ia, while the opposite holds true
for a training set dominated by SNe Ia. The smallest decrease comes from the removal of host-galaxy information.
Although the uncertainties are large, the systematic decrease
in every property suggests the benefit of including this photometry in early classification efforts.
6.3. Comparison to Previous Classifiers
We now compare our classifier to pre-existing methods in
its design. Because we have sought to overcome existing
barriers to real-time classification using physically-motivated
information instead of model complexity, our classifier is
simpler in architecture to the majority of comparative leading
methods. Earlier RNN methods for photometric classification (e.g., superNNova; Möller & de Boissière 2020) had
considered two layers of bi-directional GRUs, in which the
RNN representation of the light curve at each unit is informed
by information from both earlier and later phases. These
architectures are suited for full-phase classification but are
ill-suited for classification with an incomplete light curve.
RAPID, the first recurrent neural network to be constructed
for real-time classification, consisted of two layers of 100
uni-directional GRUs to avoid leaking information from later
phases. It was later updated to use Temporal-Convolutional
Neural units (TCNs; Bai et al. 2018). Our method uses a
single LSTM layer consisting of 60 uni-directional units. To
interpolate observations onto a uniform grid, Muthukrishna
et al. (2019) interpolated synthetic ZTF observations onto a
grid of 50 observations spanning −70 < 𝑇 −𝑇trigger < 80 days
at a 3-day cadence. Model predictions were then wrapped in
a TimeDistributed layer to provide a classification output
at each interval in phase. In contrast, we process segments of
the light curve separately through our network and interpolate each segment independently with a flexible GP. We have
chosen this approach so that our light curve representation improves as additional observations are obtained, contrary to the
stationary interpolation scheme considered by Muthukrishna
et al. (2019). This mimics model construction in real-time:
as additional observations are obtained, our understanding of
the shape and evolution of the light curve improves. Muthukrishna et al. (2019) also define a pseudo-class to distinguish
pre-explosion from post-explosion phases, and use a parametric fit to each light curve in training to estimate the time of
explosion relative to trigger. We avoid this framework so that
the network does not need to estimate the time of explosion,
=== PAGE 15 ===
15
Raw and Pad Model
Early Phase
(tN < 3 days)
Intermediate Phase
(3 < tN < 15 days)
Late Phase
(15 days < tN < 30 days)
Synthetic
ZTF BTS
Synthetic
ZTF BTS
Figure 6. First Row: Receiver Operator Characteristic (ROC) Curves for the network trained and tested directly on transient and host photometry
(without using a GP interpolation scheme). The performance has been evaluated on light curve segments truncated at early, intermediate, and
late times. The mean AUROC are reported with 1-𝜎 uncertainties in the legend of each panel. Third Row: The Precision-Recall Curves for the
same model applied to synthetic photometry. The AUPRC with 1-𝜎 uncertainties are given in the corresponding legends. Second and Fourth
Rows: ROC Curves, and Precision-Recall Curves, for the same model after 200 epochs of re-training on observed light curve segments (see
text for details).
=== PAGE 16 ===
16
100-Timestep GP Model
Early Phase
(tN < 3 days)
Intermediate Phase
(3 < tN < 15 days)
Late Phase
(15 days < tN < 30 days)
Synthetic
ZTF BTS
Synthetic
ZTF BTS
Figure 7. Same plot as Fig. 6 for the 100-Timestep GP model.
=== PAGE 17 ===
17
0.2-Day GP Model
Early Phase
(tN < 3 days)
Intermediate Phase
(3 < tN < 15 days)
Late Phase
(15 days < tN < 30 days)
Synthetic
ZTF BTS
Synthetic
ZTF BTS
Figure 8. Same plot as Fig. 6 for the 0.2-Day GP model.
=== PAGE 18 ===
18
which in the case of sparse light curves is non-trivial and nonessential for classification. We note that our model can easily
be modified to incorporate pre-explosion non-detections, as is
done in (Muthukrishna et al. 2019); this may further improve
its performance.
Two years after the development of RAPID, the real-time
classifier SCONE (Qu et al. 2021) was developed. SCONE
uses a convolutional neural network applied to 2-dimensional
‘flux-heatmap’ representations of transient light curves for
classification, after GP interpolation in wavelength and time.
The model consists of 22,606 free parameters for multi-class
classification, whereas ours consists of 17,463. We note,
however, that our model has only been constructed to distinguish three classes of SNe, whereas theirs includes SNe Iax,
SNe 91bg, and SLSNe-I for a total of six possible SN classes.
During the writing of this work, Pimentel et al. (2022) released a Deep Attention Model for photometric classification
of transients discovered by ZTF. Attention Models (Mnih
et al. 2014) are secondary neural networks added to a primary network and tasked with learning the input features
most relevant to the output of the primary network. Using a custom time-modulated attention component (called
‘TimeModAttn’), Pimentel et al. (2022) uses an auto-encoder
to learn a continuous representation of a light curve from discrete observations. Two model approaches are considered: a
serial one in which an auto-encoder simultaneously encodes
the light curves in ZTF-𝑔 and ZTF-𝑟 into a single latent vector; and a parallel one in which the light curves of an event in
each band are encoded separately, combined, and then compressed with a linear projection to arrive at a dimensionality
comparable to that of the serial model. After the partial light
curve is encoded, it is processed by a Multi-Layered Perceptron (MLP; Murtagh 1991) model with two layers, a dropout
fraction of 50%, a batch normalization component, and a final
softmax layer to convert the output of the model to a series of
classification probabilities. We note that this requires more
pre-processing than our model, and we require no dropout,
batch normalization, or attention component. Nevertheless,
the inclusion of the attention component allows for the network to predict the specific observations most relevant for
classification by the model, a major advancement in the interpretability of machine learning models used for photometric
classification.
We now compare the performance of our classifier to prior
methods. We list our balanced performance metrics at each
phase bin for the simulated and observed SN samples classified with the 0.2-Day GP model in Table 3. We acknowledge
that few commonly-reported classification metrics are intuitive; for clarity, we also provide the overall accuracy of the
network at each phase, although we caution that this is equal
to the micro-averaged precision and so is sensitive to the class
imbalance of the dataset (∼80% SNe Ia).
In Pimentel et al. (2022), the authors report the performance of their TimeModAttn models relative to a traditional
RNN with LSTM units and a Balanced Random Forest algorithm constructed from 144 features extracted from the
light curves. They evaluate these classifiers on a sample of
spectroscopically-confirmed SNe from ZTF comparable to
that used in this work. We note that these metrics are computed 100 days after detection, 70 days after our longest light
curve segment, and so denote them as Full-Phase. Using the
results from their parallel TimeModAttn network with synthetic pre-training and zero data augmentation, we provide
these balanced metrics in Table 3.
We find no statistically significant difference between the
balanced precision, F1 score, AUROC, or AUPRC of our classifier at late-phase (15 < 𝑡 𝑁 < 30) and those reported for the
TimeModAttn model 100 days from trigger, although their
mean balanced precision falls below the uncertainty range for
ours. It is likely that our results represent lower limits for
the performance of our classifier following 30 days. We find
the TimeModAttn model to be superior to our method only
in terms of balanced recall, and we emphasize that this metric is less important than precision for triggering follow-up
spectroscopy on targeted events (except in the case of rare,
high-value transients). We find the mean AUROC, AUPRC,
precision, and F1 score of our method at late-phase to be superior to the baseline random forest (BRF) model considered;
however, we caution that our statistical uncertainties across
samples are larger than each of their considered methods, and
this limits our ability to directly compare them. In addition,
Pimentel et al. (2022) considered four SN classes (SNe Ia,
SNe Ib/c, SNe II, and SLSNe-I), whereas we have excluded
SLSNe-I from our sample. Although the light curve and host
galaxy photometry of these events are reasonably distinct
from the other classes (and performance is often significantly
worse on SNe Ib/c and SNe II; these were the two SN classes
with the lowest performance across twelve classes considered
in Muthukrishna et al. 2019, while SLSNe achieved the highest late-phase AUROC values in Pimentel et al. 2022), our
results may differ when applied to the four-class problem.
Next, we compare the performance of our network to earlier
methods at partial-phase classification. The number of classifiers that report early-time performance on real data is low;
as a result, we will begin by comparing to the early performance of RAPID and SCONE on synthetic samples. We caution
that both of these classifiers considered more SN classes than
this work; in addition, whereas RAPID simulated ZTF light
curves, the SCONE framework was tested on LSST-simulated
photometry from PLAsTiCC (Kessler et al. 2019). The impact to classification of the increased spectral coverage but
=== PAGE 19 ===
19
Model
b-AUROC
b-AUPRC
b-Precision
b-Recall
b-F1 Score
Accuracy
Baseline
No Host
No Primary Training
No Adaptive Training
0.74 ± 0.04
0.72 ± 0.08
0.71 ± 0.04
0.65 ± 0.03
0.52 ± 0.07
0.48 ± 0.09
0.45 ± 0.02
0.43 ± 0.02
0.58 ± 0.13
0.48 ± 0.12
0.40 ± 0.18
0.41 ± 0.02
0.46 ± 0.09
0.41 ± 0.09
0.34 ± < 0.01
0.39 ± 0.05
0.48 ± 0.11
0.40 ± 0.08
0.30 ± 0.01
0.39 ± 0.03
0.82 ± 0.02
0.78 ± 0.02
0.81 ± < 0.01
0.66 ± 0.02
Table 2. Early-phase (< 3 day) classification metrics for the observed ZTF BTS Sample, with 0.2-day GP-interpolation scheme, for three cases:
no host photometry with the baseline training scheme, host photometry with no primary training, and host photometry with no adaptive training
(see text for details). Removing any of these components results in an average decrease in classifier performance across every metric considered.
Model
Data
Phase
b-AUROC
b-AUPRC
b-Precision
b-Recall
b-F1 Score
Accuracy
0.2-Day GP
Synthetic
Early
Intermediate
Late
Early
Intermediate
Late
0.82 ± 0.01
0.94 ± 0.02
0.98 ± 0.01
0.74 ± 0.04
0.86 ± 0.06
0.91 ± 0.04
0.55 ± 0.02
0.78 ± 0.04
0.90 ± 0.02
0.52 ± 0.07
0.59 ± 0.06
0.72 ± 0.10
0.51 ± 0.01
0.65 ± 0.02
0.77 ± 0.04
0.58 ± 0.13
0.65 ± 0.07
0.72 ± 0.11
0.61 ± 0.03
0.78 ± 0.03
0.90 ± 0.02
0.46 ± 0.09
0.58 ± 0.07
0.65 ± 0.10
0.54 ± 0.02
0.70 ± 0.03
0.82 ± 0.03
0.48 ± 0.11
0.60 ± 0.07
0.67 ± 0.10
0.74 ±< 0.01
0.85 ± 0.01
0.92 ± 0.02
0.82 ± 0.02
0.84 ± 0.04
0.87 ± 0.05
Late
Full
Full
Full
0.91 ± 0.04
0.87 ± 0.02
0.88 ± 0.03
0.90 ± 0.02
0.72 ± 0.10
0.60 ± 0.05
0.65 ± 0.05
0.68 ± 0.06
0.72 ± 0.11
0.53 ± 0.03
0.57 ± 0.03
0.59 ± 0.02
0.65 ± 0.10
0.69 ± 0.05
0.68 ± 0.04
0.73 ± 0.04
0.67 ± 0.10
0.53 ± 0.04
0.58 ± 0.04
0.61 ± 0.03
0.87 ± 0.05
-
ZTF BTS
0.2-Day GP
BRF
LSTM RNN
TimeModAttn
ZTF BTS
ZTF
ZTF
ZTF
Table 3. Classification metrics for the 0.2-Day GP RNN model evaluated on synthetic and observed (ZTF BTS) light curves at early (𝑡 𝑁 < 3
days), intermediate (3 days < 𝑡 𝑁 < 15 days), and late phases (15 days < 𝑡 𝑁 < 30 days). Upper rows indicate the performance of the model
in this work, whereas the lower rows indicate only its late-phase performance in comparison with the same metrics at full-phase (𝑡 𝑁 = 100
days) for the BRF, LSTM RNN, and TimeModAttn models from Pimentel et al. (2022). The bolded row highlights the early performance of
the classifier on the observed ZTF sample. The three models from literature are evaluated on observed ZTF light curves, but the specific SNe
considered may vary.
lower cadence of LSST relative to ZTF is an open question,
and should be investigated further.
Figure 7 of Muthukrishna et al. (2019) shows the recall of
the model across all 12 considered transient classes 2 days
since trigger. The performance on SNe II and SNe Ib/c is
the worst across all classes. Combining these classes into a
balanced-recall score, we calculate a value of 0.36, compared
to our value of 0.61 ± 0.03. Figure 8 presents these values
40 days from trigger, when the model achieves a balancedrecall of 0.57 across SNe Ia, II, and SNe Ib/c. Our late-phase
balanced recall on synthetic ZTF samples is 0.90 ± 0.02,
evaluated at least ten days earlier in phase. The confusion
matrices shown in Muthukrishna et al. (2019) indicate that
Calcium-rich transients and SNe Iax are significant contaminants for classifying SNe Ib/c; our superior performance is
likely partially attributed to not considering these classes.
Nevertheless, we find significantly improved performance on
the partial-phase light curves of dominant SN classes relative
to RAPID.
Next, we consider the partial-phase performance of SCONE
(Qu et al. 2021) on simulated LSST light curves. Fig. 4
of Qu & Sako (2022) indicates that their model achieves
(when using redshift) a balanced-recall of 0.75 ± 0.03 across
SNe Ia, SNe II, and SNe Ib/c 5 days from trigger, compared
to our lower recall of 0.61 ± 0.03 within the first 3 days.
50 days following trigger, they report a balanced recall of
0.86 ± 0.03, compared to our value of 0.90 ± 0.02 in the first 30
days. Although these results are encouraging, Table 3 reveals
the degradation in results when transitioning from synthetic
to real samples. We strongly encourage the validation of
RAPID, SCONE, and other early-time photometric classifiers on
spectroscopic SN samples to better understand the advantages
of each approach.
In addition to the full-phase metrics reported by Pimentel
et al. (2022), plots are provided for the b-AUROC values of
their models as a function of phase. At the earliest observation (approximately three days from trigger), they note a
maximum b-AUROC of ∼ 50% across all of their models
on observed ZTF SNe. Our model achieves a significantly
higher b-AUROC of 74 ± 4% within the first 3 days. They
report a b-AUROC of ∼ 75% for their BRF and LSTM RNN
models, and ∼ 85% for their TimeModAttn model at ∼ 30
days from trigger, compared to our 91 ± 4%. We conclude
that a simple architecture is able to achieve comparable or
superior performance to more complex methods, both in distinguishing between SNe Ia, II, and Ib/c at early phases and
in improving performance as more observations are obtained.
=== PAGE 20 ===
20
7. CONCLUSIONS & FUTURE WORK
We have shown that an SN classifier leveraging both transient and host-galaxy photometry can achieve comparable
performance to machine learning methods with complex architectures. Our algorithm represents one of the first attempts
to prepare for real-time SN classification at every stage of the
design and implementation pipeline. Below, we outline our
primary conclusions:
1. Between the three light curve pre-processing methods we considered (‘Raw and Pad’, ‘0.2-Day GP’, and
‘100-Timestep GP’), the ‘0.2-Day GP’ model performs
marginally better in late-phase classification. The three
classifiers achieve comparable early and time-evolving
classification when applied to the ZTF BTS data. This
suggests that the temporal evolution of the photometry
can be equally well-captured by an RNN trained on an
interpolated representation of the light curve and the
raw photometry itself, if the photometry is high-S/N
and suffers from minimal Galactic extinction (as is the
case with our high-quality sample).
2. Our late-time classification performance (between 15
and 30 days from trigger) is comparable to the leading
methods (the balanced random-forest, LSTM RNN, and
TimeModAttn networks given in Pimentel et al. 2022)
100 days from trigger. The mean balanced-recall of our
method is worse than that of the other methods considered, but this is of secondary importance for prioritizing
follow-up of common SN classes for upcoming surveys.
3. Our method, with only a single LSTM layer of 60 gated
units, achieves ∼ 25% higher balanced-AUROC than
prior methods within the first three days of observation. Table 2 suggests that this is due to a combination
of host-galaxy photometry and early light curve photometry. The decrease in performance from excluding
host-galaxy information was within the uncertainties of
the baseline results; other host galaxy properties, such
as color, may be more informative.
4. The uncertainty in each metric (estimated with 5-fold
cross-validation) is higher with our model applied to the
ZTF BTS than on synthetic data, and also higher than
that reported by Pimentel et al. (2022) for a comparable
observational dataset. This may reflect the variation
in the GP model of a single event as more data is
collected. If this is indeed the case, it reflects the
realistic stochasticity of light curve fitting in real-time.
5. There remains a fundamental mismatch between the
performance of simulations and observations. All three
models achieve impressive performance on the synthetic light curves, and suffer a degredation in performance when applied to real observations. This could be
due to overly simplistic host-galaxy correlations and/or
overly optimistic redshifts in the simulations, but we
predict that classification methods developed with simulated samples (e.g., those for PLAsTiCC and ELAsTiCC) will face an adaptation step to ensure reliable
classification on observed samples.
By constructing a normalizing flow to generate redshifts
and host-galaxy photometry for every transient in our synthetic sample, we have increased the realism of the current
generation of transient simulations. We have used point estimates for photometric redshifts, but our probabilistic approach provides full posterior distributions for each galaxy.
These distributions can reveal bimodalities and other complex behavior not captured by a point estimate, and future
work should be devoted to developing classification methods that incorporate this information (e.g., by drawing from
the redshift distribution multiple times and quantifying how
classification results change with each point estimate, or by
passing in a discretized form of the full posterior distribution).
We have found that classification performance suffered
when applying our RNN models directly to the observational
data after training with synthetic samples. The performance
of our network after re-training suggests that transfer learning
can improve the network’s robustness to realistically complex datasets. Transfer learning is rapidly becoming a critical
component of photometric classification architectures (with
Pimentel et al. 2022 and Burhanudin & Maund 2022 released
while our network was being developed), and will become
increasingly valuable in the initial years of upcoming surveys
such as LSST.
Our GP interpolation model is implemented in the
lightweight and GPU-accelerated code tinyGP; as a result,
it is competitive with the fastest GP models in the literature.
When implementing our network for classification directly
on the ZTF or LSST alert streams, our architecture can be
further optimized to ensure rapid inference. We leave this
model refinement to future work.
We have avoided using our GP to interpolate early phases of
our transient light curves, except where enough data has been
collected to construct a reasonable model for its evolution.
The growth of physics-informed machine learning in recent
years (Wu et al. 2018; Rao et al. 2020; Karpov et al. 2022) represents a promising direction for balancing model flexibility
and physically-motivated constraints. Multiple models exist
for the photometric evolution of SNe (particularly for SNe Ia;
Kenworthy et al. 2021; Mandel et al. 2022), and future work
could incorporate one of these models into the mean model of
the GP or into a distinct interpolation scheme that is only used
at early phases, where limited data is available to condition a
model.
The principles explored in this work have immediate utility for surveys whose science goals include the discovery of
=== PAGE 21 ===
21
young SNe. One of these is the Young SN Experiment (YSE;
Jones et al. 2021), a 1500 deg2 survey that began in 2019 and
that uses the Pan-STARRS telescopes to obtain well-sampled
𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑧 light curves of low-redshift SNe. A primary goal of this
survey is the characterization of early-time flux excesses in
young SNe and the construction of the low-redshift SN Ia
anchor sample for upcoming cosmological analyses with the
Vera C. Rubin Observatory. Simulations suggest that this
survey at full operation will discover ≥2 SNe within 3 days
of explosion per month, when they can be classified with
∼ 82% accuracy using our method. We aim to re-train our
classifier using simulated YSE light curves and adapt the network using the light curves consolidated as part of the First
Data Release for YSE (Aleo et al. 2023). We predict that the
increased wavelength coverage and higher cadence achieved
by augmenting ZTF light curves with YSE observations will
result in superior early classification results to the ones shown
in this work.
Although we have considered only the three dominant
classes of SNe in training and testing our network at low𝑧, the problem faced by classifiers operating directly on an
alert stream such as that served by LSST will be more difficult: they will have to classify from among the full diversity
of observed transient classes spanning 0 < 𝑧 < 3. For this
goal, the SCOTCH framework Lokken et al. (2022) will be a
valuable resource. SCOTCH encodes observed correlations
for rarer classes, including Tidal Disruption Events (TDEs;
French et al. 2017, 2020; Zabludoff et al. 2021), HydrogenPoor Superluminous SNe (SLSNe-I; Leloudas et al. 2015;
Perley et al. 2016; Angus et al. 2016), and Kilonovae (KNe;
Prochaska et al. 2006; Berger 2009). These events will represent a fraction of the full stream, but high-cadence coverage of
the early-time behavior of even a few events of these classes
will be a significant contribution to the literature. Consequently, additional work should be dedicated to extending
our classification schema to include these events.
The broad-band photometry of a galaxy in optical passbands is, at best, a limited indicator of its underlying spectral
energy distribution. Multiple degeneracies exist between, for
example, the distance to the galaxy and the color of its average stellar population, particularly across wide ranges in
redshift. We have limited our analysis to the approximate
redshift range spanned by the ZTF BTS (𝑧 < 0.2) in order
to validate our methods on observed data, and it is likely
that this has allowed us to largely avoid this drawback (although at these low distances, peculiar velocities introduce
additional scatter). LSST will dramatically increase our sample of high-redshift (𝑧 < 1) SNe, and at these distances it is
unlikely that optical host galaxy photometry alone will have
high discriminating power. We have begun investigating the
value of host galaxy star-formation rate and stellar mass in
simulated samples, but additional work should be devoted
to rapid estimation of these parameters from host galaxies
imaged with LSST (e.g., using Bayesian SED-fitting codes
such as Prospector; Johnson et al. 2021). Further, our simulations considered only the photometry of transient hosts in
PS1-𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑦; for high-redshift systems discovered by the Vera
C. Rubin Obs., the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope
(Spergel et al. 2015), and the James Webb Space Telescope
(Gardner et al. 2006), infrared photometry will play an increasing role in precise galaxy characterization, as it more
precisely traces a galaxy’s stellar mass. Observed transient
host galaxy catalogs are increasingly incorporating photometry spanning ultraviolet and infrared wavelengths (Qin et al.
2022), and future work should be dedicated to reproducing
these observations in a simulated host galaxy sample.
8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We wish to thank G. Narayan, V. Ashley Villar, R. Kessler,
J. F. Crenshaw, A. Rest, and J. Pierel for conversations that
improved this work. The authors further thank the anonymous referee for their thorough review, which has significantly strengthened this paper.
A.G. acknowledges support from the Flatiron Institute Center for Computational Astrophysics Pre-Doctoral Fellowship
Program in Spring 2022. A.G. is also supported by the Illinois Distinguished Fellowship, the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program under Grant No.
DGE – 1746047, and the Center for Astrophysical Surveys
Graduate Fellowship at the University of Illinois. A.I.M. acknowledges support during this work from the Max Planck
Society and the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation in the
framework of the Max Planck-Humboldt Research Award endowed by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research.
AIM is a member of the LSST Interdisciplinary Network for
Collaboration and Computing (LINCC) Frameworks team;
LINCC Frameworks is supported by Schmidt Futures, a philanthropic initiative founded by Eric and Wendy Schmidt, as
part of the Virtual Institute of Astrophysics (VIA). P.D.A.
is supported by the Center for Astrophysical Surveys at the
National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) as
an Illinois Survey Science Graduate Fellow.
This research used resources of the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center (NERSC), a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science User Facility located
at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, operated under
Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231.
The ANTARES project has been supported by the National Science Foundation through a cooperative agreement
with the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA) for the operation of NOIRLab, through an NSF
INSPIRE grant to the University of Arizona (CISE AST1344024, PI: R. Snodgrass), and through a grant from the
Heising-Simons Foundation.
=== PAGE 22 ===
22
ZTF is supported by National Science Foundation grant
AST-1440341 and a collaboration including Caltech, IPAC,
the Weizmann Institute for Science, the Oskar Klein Center at
Stockholm University, the University of Maryland, the University of Washington, Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron
and Humboldt University, Los Alamos National Laboratories, the TANGO Consortium of Taiwan, the University of
Wisconsin at Milwaukee, and Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratories. Operations are conducted by COO, IPAC, and
UW.
The ZTF forced-photometry service was funded under the
Heising-Simons Foundation grant #12540303 (PI: Graham).
This research made use of the Cori system associated with
the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center
(NERSC), a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science
User Facility located at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and operated under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231.
Software: ANTARES (Matheson et al. 2021), Astropy (Astropy Collaboration et al. 2013; Price-Whelan et al. 2018),
imbalanced-learn (Lemaı̂tre et al. 2017), Keras (Chollet
et al. 2015), Matplotlib (Hunter 2007), numpy (Walt et al.
2011), Pandas (pandas development team 2020), PZFlow
(Crenshaw et al. 2022), Seaborn (Waskom et al. 2014),
Scikit-Learn (Pedregosa et al. 2011), Tensorflow (Abadi
et al. 2015), tinygp11.
REFERENCES
Abadi, M., Agarwal, A., Barham, P., et al. 2015, TensorFlow:
Large-Scale Machine Learning on Heterogeneous Systems.
https://www.tensorflow.org/
Afsariardchi, N., Drout, M. R., Khatami, D. K., et al. 2021, ApJ,
918, 89, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac0aeb
Aldering, G., Adam, G., Antilogus, P., et al. 2002, in Society of
Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference
Series, Vol. 4836, Survey and Other Telescope Technologies and
Discoveries, ed. J. A. Tyson & S. Wolff, 61–72,
doi: 10.1117/12.458107
Aleo, P. D., Malanchev, K., Sharief, S., et al. 2023, Astrophysical
Journal, Supplement, 266, 9, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/acbfba
Angus, C. R., Levan, A. J., Perley, D. A., et al. 2016, MNRAS,
458, 84, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw063
Arcavi, I., Gal-Yam, A., Cenko, S. B., et al. 2012, ApJL, 756, L30,
doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/756/2/L30
Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J., et al. 2013,
A&A, 558, A33, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201322068
Bai, S., Zico Kolter, J., & Koltun, V. 2018, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1803.01271. https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.01271
Baldeschi, A., Miller, A., Stroh, M., Margutti, R., & Coppejans,
D. L. 2020, ApJ, 902, 60, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abb1c0
Beck, R., Szapudi, I., Flewelling, H., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 500,
1633, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa2587
Becker, A. C., Wittman, D. M., Boeshaar, P. C., et al. 2004, ApJ,
611, 418, doi: 10.1086/421994
Bellm, E. C., Kulkarni, S. R., Barlow, T., et al. 2019, PASP, 131,
068003, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ab0c2a
Berger, E. 2009, ApJ, 690, 231,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/690/1/231
Boone, K. 2019, AJ, 158, 257, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab5182
11 https://tinygp.readthedocs.io/en/stable/
Brout, D., Scolnic, D., Kessler, R., et al. 2019, ApJ, 874, 150,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab08a0
Burhanudin, U. F., & Maund, J. R. 2022, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2208.01328. https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.01328
Cahuantzi, R., Chen, X., & Güttel, S. 2021, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2107.02248. https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.02248
Cardelli, J. A., Clayton, G. C., & Mathis, J. S. 1989, ApJ, 345, 245,
doi: 10.1086/167900
Carrasco-Davis, R., Reyes, E., Valenzuela, C., et al. 2021, AJ, 162,
231, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac0ef1
Chambers, K. C., Magnier, E. A., Metcalfe, N., et al. 2016, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:1612.05560. https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.05560
Charnock, T., & Moss, A. 2017, ApJL, 837, L28,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aa603d
Cho, K., van Merriënboer, B., Gulcehre, C., et al. 2014, in
Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) (Doha, Qatar:
Association for Computational Linguistics), 1724–1734,
doi: 10.3115/v1/D14-1179
Chollet, F., et al. 2015, Keras, https://keras.io
Crenshaw, J. F., Kalmbach, J., Malz, A., et al. 2022, in prep.
Dimitriadis, G., Foley, R. J., Rest, A., et al. 2019, ApJL, 870, L1,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aaedb0
Durkan, C., Bekasov, A., Murray, I., & Papamakarios, G. 2019,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1906.04032.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.04032
Filippenko, A. V. 1997, ARA&A, 35, 309,
doi: 10.1146/annurev.astro.35.1.309
Filippenko, A. V., Li, W. D., Treffers, R. R., & Modjaz, M. 2001, in
Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series, Vol. 246,
IAU Colloq. 183: Small Telescope Astronomy on Global Scales,
ed. B. Paczynski, W.-P. Chen, & C. Lemme, 121
Foley, R. J., & Mandel, K. 2013, The Astrophysical Journal, 778,
167
=== PAGE 23 ===
23
Fremling, C., Miller, A. A., Sharma, Y., et al. 2020, ApJ, 895, 32,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab8943
French, K. D., Arcavi, I., & Zabludoff, A. 2017, ApJ, 835, 176,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/835/2/176
French, K. D., Wevers, T., Law-Smith, J., Graur, O., & Zabludoff,
A. I. 2020, SSRv, 216, 32, doi: 10.1007/s11214-020-00657-y
Gagliano, A., Narayan, G., Engel, A., Carrasco Kind, M., & LSST
Dark Energy Science Collaboration. 2021, ApJ, 908, 170,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abd02b
Gagliano, A., Izzo, L., Kilpatrick, C. D., et al. 2022, ApJ, 924, 55,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac35ec
Gal-Yam, A. 2017, in Handbook of Supernovae, ed. A. W. Alsabti
& P. Murdin, 195, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-21846-5 35
Gardner, J. P., Mather, J. C., Clampin, M., et al. 2006, SSRv, 123,
485, doi: 10.1007/s11214-006-8315-7
Gezari, S., Dessart, L., Basa, S., et al. 2008, ApJL, 683, L131,
doi: 10.1086/591647
Gomez, S., Berger, E., Blanchard, P. K., et al. 2020, ApJ, 904, 74,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abbf49
Gottlieb, O., Tchekhovskoy, A., & Margutti, R. 2022, MNRAS,
513, 3810, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac910
Graham, M. L., Connolly, A. J., Ivezić, Ž., et al. 2018, AJ, 155, 1,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aa99d4
Gupta, R. R., Kuhlmann, S., Kovacs, E., et al. 2016, The
Astronomical Journal, 152, 154
Guy, J., Astier, P., Baumont, S., et al. 2007, A&A, 466, 11,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20066930
Hachisu, I., Kato, M., & Nomoto, K. 1999, ApJ, 522, 487,
doi: 10.1086/307608
Hildebrandt, H., Arnouts, S., Capak, P., et al. 2010, Astronomy and
Astrophysics, 523, A31, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201014885
Hochreiter, S., & Schmidhuber, J. 1997, Neural computation, 9,
1735
Hosseinzadeh, G., Berger, E., Metzger, B. D., et al. 2022, ApJ, 933,
14, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac67dd
Huber, M., Chambers, K. C., Flewelling, H., et al. 2015, The
Astronomer’s Telegram, 7153, 1
Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing in science & engineering, 9, 90
Ivezić, Ž., Kahn, S. M., Tyson, J. A., et al. 2019, ApJ, 873, 111,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab042c
Jacobson-Galán, W. V., Dessart, L., Jones, D. O., et al. 2022, ApJ,
924, 15, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac3f3a
Jimenez Rezende, D., & Mohamed, S. 2015, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1505.05770. https://arxiv.org/abs/1505.05770
Johnson, B. D., Leja, J., Conroy, C., & Speagle, J. S. 2021, ApJS,
254, 22, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/abef67
Jones, D. O., Foley, R. J., Narayan, G., et al. 2021, ApJ, 908, 143,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abd7f5
Karpov, P. I., Huang, C., Sitdikov, I., et al. 2022, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2205.08663. https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.08663
Kasen, D. 2010, ApJ, 708, 1025,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/708/2/1025
Kenworthy, W. D., Jones, D. O., Dai, M., et al. 2021, ApJ, 923,
265, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac30d8
Kessler, R., Bernstein, J. P., Cinabro, D., et al. 2009, PASP, 121,
1028, doi: 10.1086/605984
Kessler, R., Narayan, G., Avelino, A., et al. 2019, PASP, 131,
094501, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ab26f1
Kingma, D. P., & Ba, J. 2014, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1412.6980.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980
Kisley, M., Qin, Y.-J., Zabludoff, A., Barnard, K., & Ko, C.-L.
2022, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2209.02784.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.02784
Kochanek, C. S., Shappee, B. J., Stanek, K. Z., et al. 2017, PASP,
129, 104502, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aa80d9
Korytov, D., Hearin, A., Kovacs, E., et al. 2019, ApJS, 245, 26,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ab510c
Kuncarayakti, H., Anderson, J. P., Galbany, L., et al. 2018, A&A,
613, A35, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201731923
Laplace, E., Justham, S., Renzo, M., et al. 2021, A&A, 656, A58,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202140506
Leloudas, G., Schulze, S., Krühler, T., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 449,
917, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv320
Lemaı̂tre, G., Nogueira, F., & Aridas, C. K. 2017, Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 18, 1.
http://jmlr.org/papers/v18/16-365.html
Lochner, M., McEwen, J. D., Peiris, H. V., Lahav, O., & Winter,
M. K. 2016, ApJS, 225, 31, doi: 10.3847/0067-0049/225/2/31
Lokken, M., Gagliano, A., Narayan, G., et al. 2022, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2206.02815. https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.02815
Mandel, K. S., Thorp, S., Narayan, G., Friedman, A. S., & Avelino,
A. 2022, MNRAS, 510, 3939, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab3496
Masci, F. J., Laher, R. R., Rusholme, B., et al. 2019, PASP, 131,
018003, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aae8ac
Matheson, T., Stubens, C., Wolf, N., et al. 2021, AJ, 161, 107,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abd703
Mauerhan, J. C., Smith, N., Filippenko, A. V., et al. 2013, MNRAS,
430, 1801, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt009
Mnih, V., Heess, N., Graves, A., & Kavukcuoglu, K. 2014, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:1406.6247. https://arxiv.org/abs/1406.6247
Möller, A., & de Boissière, T. 2020, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 491, 4277
Murtagh, F. 1991, Neurocomputing, 2, 183,
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0925-2312(91)90023-5
Muthukrishna, D., Narayan, G., Mandel, K. S., Biswas, R., &
Hložek, R. 2019, Publications of the Astronomical Society of the
Pacific, 131, 118002
Ni, Y. Q., Moon, D.-S., Drout, M. R., et al. 2022, Nature
Astronomy, 6, 568, doi: 10.1038/s41550-022-01603-4
=== PAGE 24 ===
24
Ofek, E. O., Sullivan, M., Cenko, S. B., et al. 2013, Nature, 494,
65, doi: 10.1038/nature11877
Pakmor, R., Kromer, M., Taubenberger, S., et al. 2012, ApJL, 747,
L10, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/747/1/L10
pandas development team, T. 2020, pandas-dev/pandas: Pandas,
latest, Zenodo, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.3509134
Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., et al. 2011, Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 12, 2825
Pepe, M. S., Cai, T., & Longton, G. 2006, Biometrics, 62, 221
Perley, D. A., Quimby, R. M., Yan, L., et al. 2016, ApJ, 830, 13,
doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/830/1/13
Perley, D. A., Mazzali, P. A., Yan, L., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 484,
1031, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty3420
Perley, D. A., Fremling, C., Sollerman, J., et al. 2020, ApJ, 904, 35,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abbd98
Perlmutter, S., Aldering, G., Goldhaber, G., et al. 1999, ApJ, 517,
565, doi: 10.1086/307221
Peterson, W., Birdsall, T., & Fox, W. 1954, Transactions of the IRE
professional group on information theory, 4, 171
Pimentel, Ó., Estévez, P. A., & Förster, F. 2022, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2201.08482. https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.08482
Planck Collaboration, Ade, P. A. R., Aghanim, N., et al. 2014,
A&A, 571, A16, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201321591
Podsiadlowski, P., Joss, P. C., & Hsu, J. J. L. 1992, ApJ, 391, 246,
doi: 10.1086/171341
Price-Whelan, A. M., Sipőcz, B. M., Günther, H. M., et al. 2018,
AJ, 156, 123, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aabc4f
Prochaska, J. X., Bloom, J. S., Chen, H. W., et al. 2006, ApJ, 642,
989, doi: 10.1086/501160
Pursiainen, M., Childress, M., Smith, M., et al. 2018, MNRAS,
481, 894, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty2309
Qin, Y.-J., Zabludoff, A., Kisley, M., et al. 2022, ApJS, 259, 13,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ac2fa1
Qu, H., & Sako, M. 2022, AJ, 163, 57,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac39a1
Qu, H., Sako, M., Möller, A., & Doux, C. 2021, AJ, 162, 67,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac0824
Quimby, R. M. 2006, PhD thesis, University of Texas, Austin
Rao, C., Sun, H., & Liu, Y. 2020, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2002.10558. https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.10558
Rasmussen, C. E. 2006, in (MIT Press)
Rest, A., Garnavich, P. M., Khatami, D., et al. 2018, Nature
Astronomy, 2, 307, doi: 10.1038/s41550-018-0423-2
Saito, T., & Rehmsmeier, M. 2015, PloS one, 10, e0118432
Sako, M., Bassett, B., Becker, A., et al. 2008, AJ, 135, 348,
doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/135/1/348
Sako, M., Bassett, B., Connolly, B., et al. 2011, ApJ, 738, 162,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/738/2/162
Shappee, B. J., Holoien, T. W. S., Drout, M. R., et al. 2019, ApJ,
870, 13, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaec79
Shivvers, I., Modjaz, M., Zheng, W., et al. 2017, PASP, 129,
054201, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aa54a6
Spergel, D., Gehrels, N., Baltay, C., et al. 2015, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1503.03757. https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.03757
Taddia, F., Stritzinger, M. D., Sollerman, J., et al. 2013, A&A, 555,
A10, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201321180
Tonry, J. L., Denneau, L., Heinze, A. N., et al. 2018, PASP, 130,
064505, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aabadf
Villar, V. A., Cranmer, M., Contardo, G., Ho, S., & Yao-Yu Lin, J.
2020a, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2010.11194.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11194
Villar, V. A., Berger, E., Miller, G., et al. 2019, ApJ, 884, 83,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab418c
Villar, V. A., Hosseinzadeh, G., Berger, E., et al. 2020b, ApJ, 905,
94, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abc6fd
Vincenzi, M., Sullivan, M., Firth, R. E., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 489,
5802, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz2448
Vincenzi, M., Sullivan, M., Graur, O., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 505,
2819, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab1353
Walt, S. v. d., Colbert, S. C., & Varoquaux, G. 2011, Computing in
Science & Engineering, 13, 22
Waskom, M., Botvinnik, O., Hobson, P., et al. 2014, seaborn: v0.5.0
(November 2014), v0.5.0, Zenodo, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.12710
Wu, J.-L., Xiao, H., & Paterson, E. 2018, Physical Review Fluids,
3, 074602, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevFluids.3.074602
York, D. G., Adelman, J., Anderson, John E., J., et al. 2000, AJ,
120, 1579, doi: 10.1086/301513
Zabludoff, A., Arcavi, I., La Massa, S., et al. 2021, SSRv, 217, 54,
doi: 10.1007/s11214-021-00829-4
=== PAGE 25 ===
