=== PAGE 1 ===
Draft version January 30, 2024
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX631
The Zwicky Transient Facility Bright Transient Survey. III. BTSbot: Automated Identification and
Follow-up of Bright Transients with Deep Learning
Nabeel Rehemtulla ,1, 2 Adam A. Miller ,1, 2 Theophile Jegou Du Laz ,3 Michael W. Coughlin ,4
Christoffer Fremling ,3, 5 Daniel A. Perley ,6 Yu-Jing Qin ,3 Jesper Sollerman ,7
Ashish A. Mahabal ,3, 8 Russ R. Laher ,9 Reed Riddle ,5 Ben Rusholme ,9 and Shrinivas R. Kulkarni
3
arXiv:2401.15167v1 [astro-ph.IM] 26 Jan 2024
1 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208, USA
2 Center for Interdisciplinary Exploration and Research in Astrophysics (CIERA), 1800 Sherman Ave., Evanston, IL 60201, USA
3 Division of Physics, Mathematics, and Astronomy 249-17, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
4 School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA
5 Caltech Optical Observatories, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
6 Astrophysics Research Institute, Liverpool John Moores University, IC2, Liverpool Science Park, 146 Brownlow Hill, Liverpool L3 5RF,
UK
7 Department of Astronomy, The Oskar Klein Center, Stockholm University, AlbaNova, SE-10691 Stockholm, Sweden
8 Center for Data Driven Discovery, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
9 IPAC, California Institute of Technology, 1200 E. California Blvd, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
ABSTRACT
The Bright Transient Survey (BTS) aims to obtain a classification spectrum for all bright (mpeak ≤
18.5 mag) extragalactic transients found in the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF) public survey. BTS
critically relies on visual inspection (“scanning”) to select targets for spectroscopic follow-up, which,
while effective, has required a significant time investment over the past ∼5 yr of ZTF operations. We
present BTSbot, a multi-modal convolutional neural network, which provides a bright transient score
to individual ZTF detections using their image data and 25 extracted features. BTSbot is able to
eliminate the need for daily human scanning by automatically identifying and requesting spectroscopic
follow-up observations of new bright transient candidates. BTSbot recovers all bright transients in our
test split and performs on par with scanners in terms of identification speed (on average, ∼1 hour
quicker than scanners). We also find that BTSbot is not significantly impacted by any data shift by
comparing performance across a concealed test split and a sample of very recent BTS candidates.
BTSbot has been integrated into Fritz and Kowalski, ZTF’s first-party marshal and alert broker, and
now sends automatic spectroscopic follow-up requests for the new transients it identifies. During the
month of October 2023, BTSbot selected 296 sources in real-time, 93% of which were real extragalactic
transients. With BTSbot and other automation tools, the BTS workflow has produced the first fully
automatic end-to-end discovery and classification of a transient, representing a significant reduction
in the human-time needed to scan. Future development has tremendous potential for creating similar
models to identify and request follow-up observations for specific types of transients.
Keywords: Time domain astronomy (2109) — Sky surveys (1464) — Supernovae (1668) — Convolutional neural networks (1938)
1. INTRODUCTION
Large,
wide-field surveys like Pan-STARRS
(Panoramic Survey Telescope and Rapid Response System; Kaiser et al. 2002), ASAS-SN (All-Sky Automated
Survey for Supernovae; Shappee et al. 2014), ATLAS
(Asteroid Terrestrial Last-Alert System; Tonry 2011;
Tonry et al. 2018; Smith et al. 2020), and ZTF (Zwicky
Transient Facility; Bellm et al. 2019a,b; Graham et al.
2019; Dekany et al. 2020; Masci et al. 2019) have made
immense contributions to time-domain astronomy by
repeatedly imaging the entire night sky. Some surveys
interface with the community through the output of
an alert stream. Alert packets comprising the stream
are intended to notify the community of the statistically significant brightening or dimming of some source
with respect to a historical reference image. The alert
stream provides time-series for a wide range of astro-
=== PAGE 2 ===
2
physical, and non-astrophysical, phenomena. We are
interested in the study of supernovae (SNe) using these
alert streams, although only a small fraction of alerts in
the unfiltered stream originate from genuine SNe. Thus,
alert filters are deployed to identify candidate sources of
interest. It is practically impossible to design an alert
filter that rejects every irrelevant alert and accepts all
alerts related to sources of interest. Therefore, manual
candidate vetting, or “scanning,” of the filtered alerts
is required. The term scanning can refer to different
actions depending on the relevant survey and science
case, but, in general, scanning has been used extensively
and very successfully in the SN community to identify
SNe for follow-up observations and further study.
The nightly data rate of the Vera C. Rubin Observatory’s Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST;
Ivezić et al. 2019) will significantly surpass our collective capacity for human scanning. Previous and ongoing surveys employ machine learning (ML) techniques
for real/bogus classification (e.g., Bailey et al. 2007;
Bloom et al. 2012; Brink et al. 2013; Wright et al. 2015;
Goldstein et al. 2015; Cabrera-Vives et al. 2017; Mahabal et al. 2019; Duev et al. 2019; Turpin et al. 2020;
Killestein et al. 2021), and adopting ML will be nearcompulsory to efficiently extract knowledge from the
next generation of surveys.
Beyond real/bogus classification, ML models have also
been applied to a variety of tasks in astronomy including
photometric transient classification (e.g., Boone 2019;
Muthukrishna et al. 2019; Hosseinzadeh et al. 2020; Villar et al. 2019, 2020; Gagliano et al. 2023), photometric redshift estimation (e.g., Carrasco Kind & Brunner
2013; Sadeh et al. 2016; Pasquet et al. 2019), and many
others. Some have also been developed to, in part, reduce scanning load by encoding phenomenological or
taxonomic information of a source in their model’s output (e.g., Bailey et al. 2007; Duev & van der Walt 2021;
Carrasco-Davis et al. 2021; Gomez et al. 2020, 2023;
Stein et al. 2023).
For the most part, ML models in astronomy perform
their tasks using extracted numeric features with architectures like random forests (Breiman 2001), or fullyconnected neural networks (McCulloch & Pitts 1943;
LeCun et al. 2015). While appropriate in some cases,
limiting these models to extracted features alone ignores
potentially valuable information present in the images
from which the features are extracted. A comparatively
small number of convolutional neural networks (CNNs;
Fukushima & Miyake 1982) have been built that make
use of the information embedded in astronomical images, and they have generally had great success (e.g.,
Dieleman et al. 2015; Lanusse et al. 2018; Domı́nguez
Sánchez et al. 2018; Duev et al. 2019; Walmsley et al.
2020). CNNs are particularly well suited to astronomy
because they can capture properties, like galaxy morphology, which often remain largely obscured to other
image processing techniques (Walmsley et al. 2019).
Only a very small subset of these CNNs are multi-modal,
meaning they take in images and input of another type,
like extracted features or a light curve (e.g., van Roestel
et al. 2021; Duev & van der Walt 2021; Carrasco-Davis
et al. 2021; Morgan et al. 2022, 2023; Stoppa et al. 2023).
We have developed a multi-modal CNN (MM-CNN) to
automate scanning for a filtered stream from ZTF.
The Bright Transient Survey (BTS; Fremling et al.
2020; Perley et al. 2020) aims to spectroscopically classify all bright (mpeak ≤ 18.5 mag in g- or r-band) extragalactic transients1 from the ZTF public alert stream
(Patterson et al. 2019). The ZTF public survey produces
> 105 alert packets per night (Mahabal et al. 2019). The
majority of these are from variable sources or are bogus
alerts, those arising from non-astrophysical phenomena.
The BTS alert filter (Perley et al. 2020) removes from
consideration most bogus alerts and many alerts from
asteroids, active galactic nuclei (AGN), cataclysmic variables (CVs), variable stars (VarStars), and alerts from
sources with m > 19.0 mag in g- and r-band. This filter makes use of braai (Duev et al. 2019) and sgscore
(Tachibana & Miller 2018) to filter the stream down to
∼50 new candidate BTS sources per night, of which ∼7
are new real bright transients. The other BTS candidates are mostly dim (mpeak > 18.5 mag) SNe or AGN,
CVs, and VarStars that were not removed by the alert
filter. All nightly BTS candidates are scanned by experts (“scanners”) who catalog (“save”) the real bright
transients and request spectroscopic observations for
classification. Scanning is performed on Fritz,2 ZTF’s
first party marshal and a SkyPortal instance (van der
Walt et al. 2019; Coughlin et al. 2023). BTS primarily
executes its follow-up observations with robotic spectrographs like the SED machine (SEDM; Blagorodnova
et al. 2018; Rigault et al. 2019; Kim et al. 2022), and,
soon, the SED machine Kitt Peak3 (SEDM-KP). The
resulting classifications, whether assigned automatically
by SNIascore (Fremling et al. 2021) or manually by a
scanner, are promptly reported to the public via the
1 Henceforth, we use “supernova” and “transient” interchangeably
with “extragalactic transient.” These are not equivalent, but it
simplifies the prose.
2 https://github.com/fritz-marshal/fritz
3 https://sites.astro.caltech.edu/sedmkp/
=== PAGE 3 ===
3
Transient Name Server4 (TNS), as visualized in Figure 1.
The BTS catalog is available online5 and is updated in
real-time. Since its origin in May 2018, BTS has maintained exceptionally high spectroscopic completeness of
relevant sources (95.4%6 ), and BTS serves the community by rapidly releasing their classifications to the public. As of October 2023, the BTS sample contains more
than 8,300 publicly classified SNe.
BTS enables a large amount of science, notably including some of the largest SN population studies conducted
to date (e.g., Perley et al. 2020; Irani et al. 2022; Sharon
& Kushnir 2022; Sollerman et al. 2022; Rodrı́guez et al.
2023; Cold & Hjorth 2023; Sharma et al. 2023). The survey also provides unique discoveries (e.g., Goobar et al.
2023; Yang et al. 2021) and is paving the way for using
SNe to study large scale structure (Tsaprazi et al. 2022).
Our new model, BTSbot, enables the automation of
scanning and spectroscopic follow-up for BTS by performing binary classification: bright transient / not
bright transient. BTSbot produces a unit-interval bright
transient score for an input ZTF Avro7 alert packet
(Masci et al. 2019; Patterson et al. 2019) augmented
with some custom metadata features. It is trained to
run only on alerts from sources with at least one alert
passing the BTS alert filter (candidate BTS sources),
the same alerts which are provided to scanners. From
image cutouts and extracted features, BTSbot must simultaneously separate transients from variable sources
and, while m > 18.5 mag, predict whether or not the
source will attain mpeak ≤ 18.5 mag.
BTSbot is now integrated into Kowalski (Duev et al.
2019; Coughlin et al. 2023), ZTF’s first-party alert
broker, and Fritz, where BTSbot has now entered
the BTS workflow. BTSbot is able to automatically
save sources to BTS catalogs and conditionally trigger SEDM/SEDM-KP. BTSbot joins a rich collection of
ML models and automation tools central to daily BTS
operations, namely braai (Duev et al. 2019), sgscore
(Tachibana & Miller 2018), pySEDM (Rigault et al. 2019),
and SNIascore (Fremling et al. 2021). Together, this
workflow has yielded the first transient to be fully automatically detected, identified, spectroscopically clas4 https://www.wis-tns.org
5 https://sites.astro.caltech.edu/ztf/bts
6 Computed for sources passing the BTS alert filter with m
peak ≤
18.5 mag, good light curve coverage, and displaying a SN-like
light curve or a galaxy cross-match from May 2018 to September
2023. We adopt this value for the BTS sample completeness
henceforth. See Perley et al. (2020) for detailed definition of
sample cuts.
7 https://avro.apache.org
sified, and publicly reported: SN 2023tyk (Rehemtulla
et al. 2023b). Zero human action was involved from
the first detection to the publicly reported spectroscopic
classification. Combining complementary ML models allows for the automation of a significant fraction of the
tasks necessary to maintain BTS. This has the side-effect
of freeing up time otherwise spent on repetitive, wellunderstood tasks, allowing for the better allocation of
expert time and resources. We make the BTSbot source
code and trained model publicly available on GitHub
(https://github.com/nabeelre/BTSbot).
2. TRAINING DATA
The quality of an ML model’s training set is a key
factor in determining its performance. ML models, especially deep learning models like BTSbot, are known
to behave unpredictably when exposed to data unlike what they were trained on (Szegedy et al. 2013;
Hendrycks & Gimpel 2016). Thus, a model’s training
set must be fully representative of the model’s input
domain. BTSbot’s domain is ZTF alert packets from
BTS candidates. These alerts come from SNe, AGN,
CVs, VarStars, novae in very nearby systems, and a
small number of other miscellaneous events including
bogus alerts of many types (e.g., those due to poor image subtractions, high proper motion stars, saturated
stars, etc.). We compile an extensive list of ZTF identifiers (ZTF-IDs) for sources that fall into these categories
by drawing from a number of repositories. With these
selections, we fully represent the wide variety of astrophysical phenomena BTSbot is exposed to in production.
An internal version of the BTS Sample Explorer is
the most significant contributor to our initial list of
ZTF-IDs. This internal BTS Sample Explorer operates
identically to the public-facing version presented in Appendix F of Perley et al. 2020, but it adds information
from internal ZTF catalogs. One of these catalogs is
assembled by scanning an alert filter nearly identical
to the BTS alert filter but altered to include sources
with 19 < mpeak [mag] < 19.8. Although these are not
strictly BTS candidates, we allow them into the training
set to increase the number of faint alerts.
We draw from these catalogs with three queries.
The first query, “trues” for short, selects bright
(mpeak ≤ 18.5 mag) spectroscopically confirmed extragalactic transients that pass the purity cut (i.e. have a
galaxy cross-match or a SN-like light curve, see Sec. 2.4
of Perley et al. 2020 for details). These bright confirmed
transients make up the entire positive/true class of our
training set. The second query, “vars” for short, selects any source classified as an AGN, CV, or quasar
(QSO) in any of the internal BTS catalogs. These
=== PAGE 4 ===
4
Figure 1. Diagram of the BTS workflow. The BTS alert filter ingests the ZTF public survey alert stream and, using upstream
tools like braai and sgscore, removes bogus alerts, dim sources, and sources that are trivially not bright transients. Selection
of real bright transients from the pool of candidates is done by visual inspection (“scanning”); in this study we develop an MLbased alternative: BTSbot. The selected bright transients receive spectroscopic follow-up and classification, and are promptly
reported to the public.
sources are all considered non-transients or are not extragalactic and thus are part of the negative/false class
regardless of their peak magnitude. The third query,
“dims” for short, selects any source that passes the purity cut with pre- and post-peak light curve coverage (see
Sec. 2.3 of Perley et al. 2020 for coverage definitions)
and mpeak > 18.5 mag. This is designed to broadly select dim SNe, which, because of their peak magnitudes,
are part of the negative class. The dims query is dominated by SNe but also includes a small number of other
sources, e.g., tidal disruption events, CVs, asteroids,
VarStars, etc. The requirement of pre- and post-peak
light curve coverage is added to avoid selecting bright
SNe with poor photometric coverage near peak, which
could then appear as having dimmer peak magnitudes.
Because peak magnitudes presented on the BTS sample
explorer are computed from public data alone, there is
a small population of sources which, due to alerts from
partnership data, have mpeak ≤ 18.5 mag but appear in
dims. These are all removed entirely from the training
set because many of them are unclassified.8 By definition, neither vars nor dims overlap with trues, but
the imperfect nature of the selections done for vars and
dims creates some overlap between the two. Sources
in the overlap are removed from dims and kept only in
vars.
Any source queried from the BTS Sample Explorer
was once marked as a bright transient by a human scanner. While we do build a sizeable list of non-bright transients saved by the human scanners, there is a missing population of BTS candidates that are never saved.
Our fourth query, “rejects” for short, represents these
sources. This list is limited to sources with alerts that
8 These were identified after the test split was revealed so, to pre-
serve the same splits, they are removed after train/validation/test
splitting is performed.
pass the BTS alert filter between January 1st 2021 and
January 1st 2023 UTC9 . Many candidates from before
January 1st 2021 encountered earlier versions of the BTS
alert filter, which was last improved in late 2020; many
candidates from after January 1st 2023 were still evolving at the time the sources were queried and thus have
potentially uncertain types. By not saving them, scanners implicitly mark these sources as non-bright transients and thus part of our negative class. This assumption is reasonable given BTS’s very high photometric completeness. An extremely small fraction of the
sources in the rejects list may be bright transients and
inject a small amount of label noise into our training
set, but we find that this effect, if present at all, is small
enough to be ignored.
There is an additional population of BTS candidates,
which we do not include in our training set: “junk” for
short. These sources, which frequently pass the BTS
alert filter, have been identified by scanners to clearly
not be bright transients. They are mostly AGN and
VarStars but also include smaller numbers of sources
like high-proper motion stars and long-lived CVs. Experiments trained on these sources frequently yielded
worse performance than equivalent models which excluded them. Some sources selected by our other queries
are also cataloged in junk ; these sources remain in
the other query and are not removed with other junk
sources.
Once we have a list of ZTF-IDs and their corresponding labels, we query Kowalski to retrieve all alert packets from each source. BTS only uses data from the ZTF
public survey, but we include data from partnership time
to increase the size of our training set. We arrange the
science, reference, and difference image cutouts of each
alert packet to form a 63×63×3 image, or a triplet. Im9 All dates and times here are in UTC unless otherwise specified.
=== PAGE 5 ===
5
Table 1. Training set size before/after cleaning cuts
Number of Sources
Number of Alerts
trues a
Initial queries
5,212
308,934
vars b
dims c
1,127
8,979
150,017
249,087
407,357
1,115,395
trues a
4,417
19,735
Cleaned training set
5,206
vars b
dims c
1,126
8,824
109,934
223,934
rejects d
Total
4,402
19,558
241,478
839,663
rejects d
Total
a Spectroscopically confirmed bright (m
peak
264,317
≤ 18.5 mag) ex-
tragalactic transients.
b Sources classified as AGN, CVs, VarStars, or QSOs.
c Dim (m
peak
> 18.5 mag) sources with transient-like light
curves.
d Sources not marked as bright extragalactic transients by
BTS scanners.
Note—Alerts are removed from the training set if they (i)
have a corrupted image cutout; (ii) come from a source with
an ambiguous label; (iii) are missing Pan-STARRS1 crossmatch information; (iv) are an i-band observation; (v) have
a negative difference image; or (vi) come from a source with
a transient present in the reference image.
age cutouts are individually normalized with Euclideannormalization10 ; pixels in masked regions are uniformly
given values of 0; cutouts smaller than 63 × 63 (due to
being near the edge of a CCD) are padded to 63 × 63
with pixels of value 10−9 . This image pre-processing is
identical to braai’s (Duev et al. 2019). Some cutouts
have pixel values uniformly set to NaN or exactly zero.
These cutouts are corrupted, and alerts with any corrupted cutouts are removed. The distribution of alerts
and sources in the training set at this stage is shown in
Table 1 under the initial queries header.
We then augment the alert packets with custom metadata features that are not already present in the ZTF
Avro alert packets: days to peak, days since peak,
age, peakmag so far, maxmag so far, and nnondet.
10 Also called L2 -normalization.
Apparent Magnitude
Name of Query
17.5
18.0
18.5
age=15.9 days
days to peak=11.9 days
days since peak=4.0 days
19.0
19.5
20.0
−12
−8
−4
0
4
Days since peak
Figure 2. Custom metadata feature definitions depicted
for the light curve of ZTF20acjlkpe. Teal (g-band) and red
(r-band) circles indicate detections. days to peak (purple),
days since peak (green), age (navy), peakmag so far (upper dashed gray), and maxmag so far (lower dashed gray)
are presented for the latest detection shown. Together, these
features make simplified information of the light curve phase
and shape available to BTSbot (shown as the orange line,
which assumes that maxmag so far corresponds to the first
detection).
The feature days to peak encodes the number of days
from the first alert to the alert with the brightest magnitude thus far for the source in question. Closely related
is days since peak, which represents the number of
days from the current alert to the alert with the brightest
magnitude. The sum of these quantities is the age. The
features peakmag so far and maxmag so far encode the
brightest and dimmest magnitude of all alert packets
from this source thus far; peakmag so far is particularly crucial for correctly classifying late-time alerts of
SNe because BTSbot would otherwise have almost no information on the brightness history of the source. These
features are shown over an example light curve in Figure 2. They clearly do not recover the light curve perfectly, but they are adopted because of their simplicity and effectiveness across a very large variety of light
curves. We find that giving BTSbot high-level information on the source’s current phase and the rough shape
of its light curve with these features yields a significant
boost in performance. Many methods exist to more
faithfully represent SNe light curves, but many are not
conditioned to model light curves of the other sources
in BTSbot’s domain, e.g. AGN, VarStars, and others.
Notably, these features are defined for all sources with
as few as one detection or detections in only one photometric passband. One could extract more informa-
=== PAGE 6 ===
6
Bright transients
Nmax = 100
Probability
0.015
0.010
0.005
0.000
Dim transient–like
BTS Rejects
Variables
Nmax = 100
0.03
Probability
tion from the light curve by decoupling these features
to passband-dependent equivalents, however, this would
create instances of alerts having missing features potentially compromising the model’s performance. Lastly,
the feature nnondet is an estimation of the number
of non-detections at the source’s location. This feature was used in the ALeRCE real-time stamp classifier (Carrasco-Davis et al. 2021) and was found to have
high importance for distinguishing alerts between their
five classes; we find that including it similarly boosts
BTSbot’s performance.
All of these features are computed for each alert packet
from its perspective, i.e., only using information already
available at the time the alert packet was created, including alerts from before each source passed the BTS
alert filter. Additionally, some alerts were created before the latest version of braai went into production
and thus have a deep real-bogus score (drb) from an
outdated version of braai or no drb at all. We rerun
all alert packets through the d6 m9 version of braai and
replace all drb scores with these new scores.
Next, we clean our training set with a series of cuts.
First, we remove alerts from i-band observations and
alerts with negative difference images. The i-band alerts
are removed primarily because BTS draws from the ZTF
public survey, which only takes observations in g- and
r-band. Negative difference images are identified using
the isdiffpos flag included in the ZTF alert packets.
Alerts with negative difference images are removed because they frequently represent instances of SNe or other
transients visible in the reference image: a configuration
different than what is typical for an alert. As an extra
precaution, we compile a list of sources with SNe present
in the reference images and remove them from the training set. Additionally, some sources fit into neither or
both of our classes and are correspondingly removed
from our training set. For example, ZTF18abdiasx appears to be a bright supernova projected on top of an
AGN, and thus fits in both of our classes so it is removed from the training set. Some of the metadata features we choose to include reference the Pan-STARRS1
catalog (PS1; Kaiser et al. 2002): sgscore{1,2} and
distpsnr{1,2}. When there are no PS1 sources within
30 arcseconds of a given ZTF alert, these features are
set to −999. We remove all alerts with −999 in any of
these four fields. Table 1 shows the counts of sources
and alerts at this stage under the cleaned training set
header. Each of the four queries loses some alerts in the
cleaning process, however, the rejects query loses more
than 150, 000 alerts. These 150, 000 alerts are almost entirely negative difference image alerts, which come from
0.02
0.01
0.00 0
10
101
102
103
Number of alerts per source
Figure 3. Gaussian kernel density estimations showing the
number of alerts per source for each query comprising our
cleaned training set. Top: positive class examples; Bottom: negative class examples. Sources with many alerts are
thinned down to Nmax = 100 alerts per source. This prevents
long-lived sources like AGN (in Variables) and bright SNe (in
Bright transients) from being over-represented in training.
sources like binary stars, AGN, and high-proper motion
stars.
We employ standard practices for splitting the full
training set into train, validation, and test splits. We
randomly assign sources to these splits with probabilities of 81%, 9%, and 10% respectively11 . This splitting is
done on sources rather than alerts to prevent any source
from having alerts in multiple splits, which would produce a validation and test bias that overestimates the
true performance of the model.
Figure 3 illustrates that, as expected, the typical number of alerts per source is variable over the four different
queries. Some AGN in vars have > 103 alerts, while
some SNe have as few as two alerts. We correct this imbalance by defining a hyperparameter Nmax : the maximum number of alerts per source allowed in the training
set. Sources with more than Nmax alerts will have some
alerts removed and those with Nmax or fewer alerts will
remain untouched.
11 90% of the training data is seen by the model during development
and the remaining 10% is concealed until hyperparameters are
finalized.
=== PAGE 7 ===
7
Sources
Validation
11, 604
4, 238 1, 259
Alerts
Train
300, 563
167, 436 41, 811
73.2%
64.2%
26.8%
Dim transient-like
35.8%
73.4%
65.9%
Variables
Test
456 1, 489
26.6%
74.4%
512
25.6%
21, 676 51, 214
26, 243
BTS Rejects
Bright transients
34.1%
66.1%
33.9%
Figure 4. Bar charts showing the distribution of sources and alerts from 4 queries into train/validation/test (81%/9%/10%)
splits. Certain sources have an upper limit set on their number of alerts, excess alerts are removed. Our training set is imbalanced
favoring not-BTS sources ∼3:1 and favoring the not-BTS alerts ∼2:1.
We apply Nmax alert thinning to sources based on
which query they originate from and which split they
are present in. For sources in the trues, dims, and rejects queries (many of which are galactic or extragalactic transients), we want BTSbot to learn and identify
their properties at all phases of their evolution, so we
take a simple uniform random selection of Nmax alerts
to preserve and discard all others. The remaining alerts
are roughly uniformly distributed over the rise, peak,
and fade of these transients12 . For sources in the vars
query, we keep only the most recent Nmax alerts. Metadata of long-lived sources look systematically different
in the present than they did years ago. For example,
AGN were typically first detected near the beginning of
ZTF and have been repeatedly detected since. New incoming alerts from these AGN, those that BTSbot will
encounter in production, will typically have very large
age and ndethist (approximately, number of previous
detections), but those nearer to when they were first detected will have much smaller age and ndethist. By
selecting the latest Nmax alerts, we capture those which
are most representative of today’s BTS candidates, and
we avoid a data shift that would dramatically worsen
BTSbot’s performance in production. Early versions of
BTSbot used random Nmax thinning on vars sources and
yielded markedly worse performance. We find the optimal value to be Nmax = 100 (see Sec. 3.1 for optimization details).
12 Observational
coverage of transients is typically greater near
peak, so this simple random selection will slightly favor removing
alerts near peak. We do not expect significantly different results
if we attempted to correct for this.
The CVs in vars are transients like the sources in trues
and dims, and we want to capture alerts from all stages
of their evolution, rather than just late-time. The selection of the latest Nmax = 100 alerts from vars sources
does not significantly impact our coverage of CV evolution because most CVs are very rapidly evolving and
have fewer than Nmax = 100 alerts, so they typically
receive no thinning at all.
Sources from all queries in the train split get Nmax
alert thinning to avoid the over-representation problem. In the validation and test splits, however, only
sources from the vars query get alert thinning. The
other sources are left un-thinned because (i) overrepresentation is not an issue, and (ii) we need all alerts
from these sources to most accurately measure completeness and purity of the BTSbot predictions. We keep alert
thinning in place for the vars sources in the validation
and test splits because the very old alerts from these
long-lived AGN are unlike what appears in present day
scanning.
Figure 4 shows the number of sources and alerts in
each split and the query which they originated from after all cuts and thinning are applied. Our two classes
are moderately imbalanced: ∼35% BTS alerts to ∼65%
not-BTS alerts. We discuss techniques for mitigating
the effects of class imbalance in Sec. 3. In total, our production training set comprises 608,943 total alerts from
19,558 total sources totalling >60 GB. Despite BTSbot’s
relatively narrow domain, this is significantly more alerts
than other models with similar architectures, such as
the ALeRCE stamp classifier (∼52,000; Carrasco-Davis
et al. 2021) and the ACAI models (∼200,000; Duev &
van der Walt 2021).
=== PAGE 8 ===
8
3. BTSbot SCOPE, ARCHITECTURE, AND
Table 2. BTSbot layer configurations
TRAINING
Our MM-CNN, BTSbot, automates source identification for BTS by assigning each ZTF alert packet a bright
transient score. Figure 5 shows how input is fed into
BTSbot and how information is combined to produce the
output score; BTSbot contains three main components.
(1) The convolutional branch processes the science, reference, and difference cutouts as a three-channel image
through a VGG-like architecture (Simonyan & Zisserman 2014). (2) The metadata branch processes the 25
extracted features (see Table 4) through a batch normalization layer and two dense layers. (3) The combined
section concatenates the output of the two branches
and passes it through two more dense layers, the second of which produces the prediction using a softmax
activation function. The output is a unit-interval score
where higher scores represent increased confidence that
the source in the input alert packet is, or will become,
a bright extragalactic transient. The parameters for
each layer are shown in Table 2. Other than the final layer, activation functions are all the rectified linear
unit (ReLU; Nair & Hinton 2010), and all convolutional
layers have symmetric unit stride and same padding.
The choice of a MM-CNN is motivated by the fact
that the images and the extracted features provide complementary information for performing our task. For
example, the extracted feature distpsnr1 represents
the angular distance to the PS1 cataloged source nearest to this ZTF source, and sgscore1 represents the
star-galaxy score (Tachibana & Miller 2018) of this PS1
source. While new transients are not present in PS1,
the host galaxies of supernovae (SNe) often are. Thus,
alerts from SNe tend to have moderate distpsnr1 and
small sgscore1 values, indicating a galaxy projected
nearby to the source. Most AGN and some CVs that
pass the BTS alert filter are cataloged in PS1 and thus
have distpsnr1 very near to zero. The images also provide important information following a similar heuristic. Bright SNe tend to be associated with prominent (bright with large angular size) off-center extended
sources, their host galaxies; faint SNe tend to have less
prominent host galaxies because they tend to be farther
away; AGN will appear as exactly centered extended
sources; CVs will often appear surrounded by many
bright point sources because they tend to occur near
the galactic plane around many other stars. CarrascoDavis et al. (2021) give more detailed descriptions of
how AGN, SNe, and VarStars can be distinguished using
ZTF image cutouts and metadata. A MM-CNN is able
to pool information from all input types and consider
Layer type
Layer parameters
Convolutional branch
2D Conv.
32 filters, 5 × 5 kernel
2D Conv.
32 filters, 5 × 5 kernel
Max pool
2 × 2 kernel
Dropout
0.50
2D Conv.
64 filters, 5 × 5 kernel
2D Conv.
64 filters, 5 × 5 kernel
Max pool
4 × 4 kernel
Dropout
0.55
Metadata branch
Batch norm.
Dense
128 units
Dropout
0.25
Dense
128 units
Combined section
Dense
8 units
Dropout
0.20
Dense
1 unit
Hyperparameter
search range
8 – 128 filtersa
[3, 5, 7] kernel sizea
0.1 – 0.8
8 – 128 filtersa
[3, 5, 7] kernel sizea
0.1 – 0.8
32 – 256 units
0.1 – 0.8
32 – 256 units
8 – 128 units
0.1 – 0.8
-
a All 2D Convolutional (Conv.) layers have the same search
range for filter counts and kernel size.
Note—Images and metadata are passed through their respective branches, and the output of either is concatenated and
sent to the combined branch. Dropout and batch normalization (batch norm.) layers are included to regularize.
them together when making a prediction. We also experiment with uni-modal alternatives to BTSbot in Appendix B.
Given the scope and architecture of BTSbot we encounter a number of challenges. First, we are requiring BTSbot to learn multiple complex separations.
BTSbot must learn to separate SNe from other sources
without using redshift information because it is not always known a priori. It must also learn to identify
bright SNe with limited time-series information irrespective of the SN’s current phase. Early in its rise or late
in its fade, a bright SN can appear very similar to a
near-peak dim SN. Additionally, BTSbot does not have
explicit information stating the BTS threshold is 18.5
mag. Rather, it must learn the position of this threshold
drawn through the continuous distribution of SNe peak
magnitudes. Lastly, BTSbot does not have direct access
to full light curve information, i.e., information on every
previous individual detection. Instead, it has access to
the basic custom metadata features we compute from
=== PAGE 9 ===
9
science
reference
difference
magpsf,
age,
...
Figure 5. Diagram of our multi-modal convolutional neural network, BTSbot, performing bright extragalactic transient / notbright extragalactic transient binary classification on ZTF alert packets. Image input is processed through the convolutional
branch and then flattened to a 1D vector and concatenated with the output of dense layers in the metadata branch. After
another dense layer, a single-neuron layer produces the final prediction: a unit-interval bright transient score.
the full light curve. We omit full light curve information, in part, because there is no established method in
the literature for representing partial light curves of the
wide variety our model encounters in a way that is fit
for input into a neural network. There has been a great
deal of work to accomplish this for SNe alone (e.g., Villar et al. 2020), but these methods are not applicable
to all the types of sources that BTSbot encounters. This
choice supports the possibility of tuning BTSbot to identify extragalactic transients very rapidly, potentially on
their first detection, which Section 5.3 explores.
Table 3. BTSbot hyperparameters
Parameter name
Optimized value
batch size
Adam β1
Adam β2
learning rate (α)
α decrease factor
αmin
Nmax
64
0.99
0.99
10−4
0.4
5 × 10−10
100
Hyperparameter
search range
8 – 64
0.81 – 0.999
0.9 – 0.9999
10−2 – 5 × 10−6
0.25 – 0.75
10−10 – 10−5
1–∞
3.1. Training and hyperparameter optimization
BTSbot is implemented with TensorFlow (Abadi et al.
2015) and the Keras API (Chollet et al. 2015). We adopt
the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba 2014) and the binary cross-entropy loss function. In addition to thinning
a source’s alerts by Nmax (see Sec. 2), we make use of
a number of training techniques to mitigate overfitting.
We employ data augmentation, which executes random
rotations of 0◦ , 90◦ , 180◦ , and 270◦ and random horizontal and vertical flipping on the image cutouts. These
also help ensure that BTSbot is invariant to these transformations. We weight contributions to the loss function
by the inverse of the relative size of the input alert’s class
(i.e. misclassifications of BTS alerts contribute more
loss than that of not-BTS alerts). This size is computed
by the count of alerts per class in the train split, but
we also experiment with computing these weights based
on the number of sources per class. The learning rate
α decreases after 20 epochs without improved validation
loss and training terminates after 75 epochs without improved validation loss.
We utilize the Weights and Biases platform (Biewald
2020) to perform multiple extensive Bayesian hyperparameter sweeps. A Bayesian hyperparameter sweep
guides searching through a large grid of hyperparameters intelligently by leveraging correlations between
previous hyperparameter inputs and the corresponding trained model’s performance in a specified metric.
This is expected to be more efficient than traditional
grid search sweeps because, for example, the Bayesian
sweep can learn to avoid certain regions of the hyperparameter space that frequently yield poor performing
models. We find the optimal configuration of hyperparameters for BTSbot layers (see Table 2), the selec-
=== PAGE 10 ===
10
1.0
Table 4. BTSbot metadata features
days since peak
days to peak
age
peakmag so far
maxmag so far
nnondeta
Alert packet metadata
Star/Galaxy score of nearest two PS1 sources
Distance to nearest two PS1 sources [arcsec]
Full Width Half Max [pixels]
magnitude of PSF-fit photometry [mag]
1-σ uncertainty in magpsf [mag]
Reduced χ2 of PSF-fit
Right ascension of source [deg]
Declination of source [deg]
5-σ magnitude detection threshold [mag]
Number of previous detections of source
# of PS1 cross-matches within 30 arcsec
Deep learning-based real/bogus score
# of times source on a field and read channel
χ parameter of nearest source in reference
sharp parameter of nearest source in reference
Peak-pixel S/N in detection image
Local sky background estimate [DN]
Custom metadata
Time since brightest alert [days]
Time from first to brightest alert [days]
days since peak + days to peak
Source’s minimum magpsf thusfar [mag]
Source’s maximum magpsf thusfar [mag]
ncovhist - ndethist
a Adopted from Carrasco-Davis et al. (2021).
Note—The 25 metadata features passed into BTSbot’s metadata branch.
Full definitions of alert packet features can
be found at https://zwickytransientfacility.github.io/ztf-avro-alert/
schema.html.
tion of metadata features (see Table 4), and other values (see Table 3). Tables 2 and 3 also include the
range of values searched over for each hyperparameter in our sweeps. The search over which alert packet
metadata features to provide to BTSbot included many
other features which we found to not improve performance: sgscore3, distpsnr3, fid, maggaia, neargaia,
magdiff, magap, sigmaap, magapbig, sigmaapbig,
magnr, ssnrms, dsnrms, seeratio, nneg, magzpsci,
jdstarthist, and classtar.
4. BTSbot PERFORMANCE AND COMPARISON
TO HUMAN SCANNERS
4.1. Performance on the test split
True positive rate
sgscore{1,2}
distpsnr{1,2}
fwhm
magpsf
sigmapsf
chipsf
ra
dec
diffmaglim
ndethist
nmtchps
drb
ncovhist
chinr
sharpnr
scorr
sky
Definition [unit]
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.8
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.0
True label
BTS
not-BTS
Feature name
1.0
0.2
Production model
ROCAUC=0.985
Other trials
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
False positive rate
96.6%
3.4%
8.5%
91.5%
1.0
not-BTS
BTS
Predicted label
Figure 6. ROC curve (top) and confusion matrix (bottom)
of the BTSbot production model and 19 other trials with
different initializations. Top: The production BTSbot model
(orange curve) and 19 other trials (gray curves) yield very
similar ROC curves and ROCAUCs, indicating that BTSbot’s
excellent performance is robust to different initializations.
Bottom: The production model’s confusion matrix makes
clear that BTSbot has greater TN rate (upper-left quadrant)
than TP rate (lower-right quadrant). We find that models
which trade-off TP rate in favor of TN rate tend to improve
in other key performance metrics.
To characterize BTSbot’s generalizable performance,
we present performance metrics on test split data. We
train 20 trials of BTSbot with identical optimal hyperparameters and different random initializations of the
model’s learnable parameters. The trial which yields
the best test split performance is chosen as the production model. Performance metrics are reported for the
chosen production model and the median of the met-
=== PAGE 11 ===
11
ric for the 20 trials with uncertainties representing the
metric’s 1-σ bounds.
The final BTSbot models yield test accuracy of 94.1%±
0.28 and 94.9% for the production model. The upper panel of Figure 6 shows BTSbot’s receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curves. ROC curves visualize the
balance of true and false positives at various classification thresholds, and the area under the ROC curve (ROCAUC) is frequently used as a summary statistic for the
performance of a classifier. A perfect classifier’s ROC
curve has ROCAUC equal to unity while ROCAUC=0.5
corresponds to random guessing (on a balanced dataset).
The final BTSbot models yield ROCAUC=0.984 ± 0.001
and ROCAUC=0.985 for the production model. The results of the production model and the 19 other trials are
extremely similar, indicating stability in BTSbot’s performance over different initializations. The lower panel
of Figure 6 shows the production model’s confusion matrix. A binary classifier’s confusion matrix visualizes the
frequencies of the four classification outcomes: true negative (TN), false positive (FP), false negative (FN), and
true positive (TP). The production model shows higher
accuracy on not-BTS alerts (TN rate) than on BTS
alerts (TP rate). We could attempt to train BTSbot to
better balance the TP and TN rates, for example by adjusting the class-weights, but we find that models which
favor TN rate perform better overall.
While we fare excellently in traditional ML performance metrics, they are not necessarily representative of
BTSbot’s real-world performance. Because BTSbot produces scores on alert packets (alert-based classification)
but sources must be chosen for follow-up (source-based
classification), we must define a mapping from a sequence of alert predictions to a source prediction. We
call these mappings “policies,” which we define to be
analogous to the criteria BTS scanners use when deciding whether or not to save a source and request a
spectrum of it. By simulating our policies on BTS candidates, we can compute performance metrics which realistically represent how BTSbot performs as a scanner.
Further, we can compare the resulting figures against
human scanners to contextualize BTSbot’s performance.
We define two policies which closely emulate their human scanning analogs: bts p1 and bts p2. The policy bts p1 requires that a source have at least two
alerts with high (≥ 0.5) bright transient score and
magpsf ≤ 19 mag before being saved and having an
SEDM trigger sent at priority 1. The policy bts p2 requires that a source meet bts p1 as well as having at
least one alert with magpsf ≤ 18.5 mag before a trigger being sent with priority 2. Priority is a parameter
of the requests sent to SEDM, where larger values indi-
cate the request is more urgent. Higher priority requests
are typically fulfilled before lower priority requests, although other factors, e.g. observability, are also taken
into account. Most follow-up requests sent by BTS scanners are with priority 1 or 2, and priorities 2 and greater
are typically reserved for sources which have already attained mpeak ≤ 18.5 mag.
We quantify the performance of these policies with
completeness, purity, ∆tsave , and ∆ttrigger . Completeness (or “recall”) is the fraction of bright transients
which are correctly classified by the policy: TP/(TP +
FN). The completeness of bts p1 and bts p2 are identical, so we report a single value for both policies. Purity
(or “precision”) is the fraction of predicted bright transients that are actually bright transients: TP/(TP+FP).
∆tsave/trigger , is the difference between the Julian Date
(JD) at which BTSbot saved and triggered on a source
with the JD that scanners did the same. The JDs for
scanners are queried from Fritz for all sources in the
trues set (see Sec. 2). Sources that were saved before
January 1st 2021 are removed from this analysis because
many of them were scanned using the GROWTH Marshal (Kasliwal et al. 2019), so the save and trigger JDs
available on Fritz are unreliable. For saving, we use the
JD at which a scanner added a source to the BTS catalog on Fritz. For triggering, we only consider sources
which had an SEDM integral field unit (IFU) request
sent before their first spectrum was uploaded to Fritz.
The JD used for comparison is the JD at which the first
IFU follow-up request was created. This restriction is
applied because the time at which scanners decided to
trigger is not available for the other facilities BTS uses
for classification. BTSbot’s JD for saving and triggering
on a source is the JD associated with the alert that first
made the source satisfy bts p1. The BTSbot JDs correspond to either policy, but we select bts p1 as it makes
for a more direct comparison to scanners.
When computing completeness and purity for these
policies, we make two additional minor cuts. First, 70
sources in the test split also appear in junk (see Sec. 2).
This catalog is a list of sources that are unambiguously
not bright transients which frequently pass the BTS
alert filter. When scanning, they are typically hidden
and not considered for saving or triggering; they are excluded from completeness and purity calculations. We
also identify 59 sources which have only a single alert
remaining after the cleaning cuts (see Sec. 2). These
sources will never pass either policy, so they are also
excluded from completeness and purity calculations.
We use estimates of the scanners’ completeness, purity, and speed as benchmarks against which to judge
BTSbot’s performance. We compute a lower-limit on
=== PAGE 12 ===
12
100%
Saving
Triggering
90%
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
80%
Completeness
17.0
17.5
Purity
18.0
Peak magnitude
18.5 −15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
Days after action by scanner
Figure 7. Completeness and purity of BTSbot actions (left) and speed comparison with human scanners (right) for sources in
our test split. Left: The completeness curve (dash-dot navy) is 100% in all bins. BTSbot’s perfect completeness is conducive to
BTS’s science efforts which require a highly-complete, unbiased sample. The small variations in the purity curve (solid orange)
are due to small number statistics. The overall purity of bts p1 and bts p2 are 84.6% and 93.0% respectively. bts p1 has
extra contamination from SNe with mpeak slightly greater than 18.5 mag, sources which are acceptable targets for spectroscopic
observation. Right: Histograms comparing BTSbot’s speed in saving (blue) and triggering (red) with that of scanners. Both
distributions peak very near to zero indicating that BTSbot acts as quickly as human scanners on new bright transients.
the scanners’ saving completeness of bright transients
from values presented in Table 1 and Section 3 of Perley et al. (2020), which give 99.6% completeness. It is
not straightforward to compute the BTS scanners’ purity for saving or triggering on bright transients. Scanners will often intentionally act on transients which
they know will not attain mpeak ≤ 18.5 mag,13 so
straightforward estimates of the scanners’ bright transient purity would underestimate their ability to select
only bright transients. Instead, we estimate their saving and triggering purity for selecting any extragalactic transient and rejecting other sources. We limit
this analysis to saves and triggers performed between
2460175.5 < JD < 2460216.5 (see Sec. 4.2 for explanation of JD bounds). During this time, 266 sources
were saved by scanners to the primary internal BTS
catalog, only 4 of which were not extragalactic transients: 98.5% scanner saving purity. Similarly, scanners sent SEDM IFU for 327 unique sources of which 11
were non-extragalactic transients: 96.7% scanner triggering purity. Further, scanners saving and triggering on transients with mpeak > 18.5 mag complicates
∆tsave/trigger estimates. Scanners will save and trigger
on transients slightly faster than otherwise because they
need not wait for a transient to unambiguously demonstrate that it will soon have mpeak ≤ 18.5 mag. In addition, BTS scanners are occasionally aided in identifying
13 These sources, while not “bright” transients, are still of interest
to BTS and the individuals within BTS.
bright transients by TNS reports from scanners working
with other surveys or other ZTF alert brokers. For these
reasons, ∆tsave/trigger comparisons will not be perfectly
direct, but we still adopt them as a basic benchmark for
BTSbot’s speed.
The left panel of Figure 7 shows BTSbot’s completeness and purity under our policies as a function of peak
magnitude. The completeness curve is exactly 100% in
all peak magnitude bins, giving perfect overall completeness. This compares well to the BTS scanners’ saving
completeness: 99.6%. Very high completeness is essential for maintaining the quality of the BTS sample
and ensuring that BTSbot does not inject any significant selection biases into the BTS sample. The purity curve is > 90% in all peak magnitude bins. Most
bins have < 10 FPs, so the variations between bins is
likely due to small number statistics. Overall purity
for bts p2 is 93.0%, and overall purity for bts p1 is
84.6%. The bts p1 purity is not aligned with the purity curve because bts p1 also considers a large number
of sources with mpeak > 18.5.14 Contamination from
dim (mpeak > 18.5) transients is the reason why the
bts p1 purity is much less than the bts p2 purity; they
make up 53 of the 54 FPs unique to bts p1. These 53
transients have median mpeak of 18.57 mag and many
received spectroscopic follow-up requests by BTS. They
are still of interest to members of BTS, so they repre14 Completeness and purity are not shown for m
peak > 18.5 because
they are undefined and uniformly zero respectively.
=== PAGE 13 ===
13
Typical bts_p1 false positive
ZTF21acjvgxg
Apparent Magnitude
Typical true positive
ZTF18aaunfqq
Typical bts_p2 false positive
ZTF21aaxzcri
score ≥ 0.5
score < 0.5
18.5
g-band
r-band
19.0
19.5
20.0
−16
0
16
32
−8
0
8
16
24
0
8
16
24
Days since peak
Figure 8. Light curves of three sources depicting typical evolution of BTSbot scores. Teal (g-band) and red (r-band) points
indicate detections, and filled and open circles represent alerts which received score ≥ 0.5 and < 0.5 respectively. Left: TPs
may have low scoring alerts while still dim, but scores increase once they near the 18.5 mag threshold (dotted gray line). After
fading well below the peak magnitude, scores remain high, in part, due to information provided by custom metadata features.
Center: Almost all bts p1 FPs are dim (mpeak > 18.5 mag) transients whose alerts receive high scores when near the BTS
threshold. Right: Many bts p2 FPs are CVs, which could be better rejected by increasing the score threshold to 0.8.
sent a reasonable use of follow-up resources. BTSbot’s
purity falls slightly (∼ 2% − 6%) short of the scanners’
(98.5% saving, 95.6% triggering). Likely at the cost of
completeness or speed, alternative policies could be designed to more conservatively allocate spectroscopic resources, increasing BTSbot’s purity to compare favorably with scanners. BTSbot’s behavior is dependent on
braai and sgscore because they contribute to determining what sources pass the BTS alert filter: the only
sources which BTSbot trains and triggers on.
The right panel of Figure 7 shows histograms comparing the time at which BTSbot and the human scanners
saved or triggered on a source. Negative values indicate
that BTSbot was faster, and positive values indicate that
the scanners were faster. Both histograms peak sharply
at 0 days, suggesting that scanners and BTSbot act on
new transients at the same time. The median of ∆tsave
and ∆ttrigger are −0.0381 days and −0.0147 days respectively; BTSbot acts marginally quicker than scanners. Much of this performance is likely due to BTSbot’s
decisions being made immediately as new alerts filter
through the ZTF and BTS pipelines, although BTS
does benefit from consistent real-time scanning thanks
to members in European time-zones.
The tails of this distribution include 6 (11) sources
which are saved by BTSbot a week or more before (after) scanners did. Nuclear and hostless SNe make up
most of the cases where BTSbot was faster. This suggests BTSbot is less hesitant to claim these challenging sources to be bright transients. Most of the cases
where BTSbot is slower than scanners are slowly evolving SNe with a history of detections down to ∼20 mag.
These suggest that scanners can better use the evolution prior to reaching 19 mag to identify transients,
and BTSbot needs brighter detections to identify sources.
Late identifications of these sorts are unlikely an issue
because BTSbot still consistently identifies these sources
before or near peak. Sources with poor light curve coverage, especially around 19 mag, cause large ∆tsave and
∆ttrigger and appear in either of these groups. Overall,
BTSbot fares very well in time to save and trigger when
compared to scanners.
4.1.1. Analysis of misclassifications in test split
Tracking and categorizing misclassifications is a key
part of the development of ML models. Misclassifications are particularly important to understand in the
case of BTSbot because mistakes could introduce biases
into the BTS sample and waste valuable spectroscopic
resources.
On test split data, bts p1 selects 92 FPs and 0 FNs.
The majority of the FPs (53/92) are real dim transients.
These are sources outside of BTSbot’s positive class but
are still of interest to BTS, so they are acceptable FPs.
Nearly all of the remaining FPs are CVs, AGN or QSOs
and are shared with bts p2. The center panel of Figure 8 presents an instance of a typical bts p1 FP. Alerts
are classified as not belonging to a bright transient until
the source nears the 18.5 mag threshold, at which point
a small number of high-scoring alerts cause the source
=== PAGE 14 ===
14
1.0
True positive rate
to pass bts p1. The right panel shows a FP CV misclassified by both bts p1 and bts p2. It shows highand low-scoring alerts interspersed with each other, although some other CV FPs begin receiving exclusively
low scores once the CV has faded well beyond peak. The
completeness is perfect for bts p1 and bts p2, so they
have zero FNs.
Overall, the non-SN misclassifications are dominated
by a relatively small number of CVs, AGN, and QSOs.
Improved policies may be able to improve the rejection
of these frequent FPs by, e.g., better leveraging existing
information in external catalogs. The majority of the
total misclassifications (dim SNe selected by bts p1) are
not problematic for BTS and represent an appropriate
allocation of spectroscopic time.
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.8
0.0
0.2
0.2
Present-day (ROCAUC=0.988)
Test split (ROCAUC=0.985)
0.0
0.0
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
False positive rate
1.0
Performance diagnostics computed on test split data
tend to be robust and representative of real-world performance, but, in some cases, can have associated biases.
Our test split includes many alerts that are years old and
a subtle data shift (caused by, e.g., maintenance to the
camera or the optics) may have occurred since then. To
characterize BTSbot’s present-day performance we conduct an additional analysis using alerts from very recent
BTS candidates.
We perform this analysis in two parts: (i) we present
alert-based performance metrics on alerts that recently
passed the BTS alert filter and our cleaning cuts (see
Sec. 2); (ii) we also present policy-based performance
metrics on sources that recently passed bts p1 or recently peaked. The date boundaries for these analyses
are determined by the final date our training data was
queried (19 August 2023) and the date BTSbot went into
production (29 September 2023): 2460175.5 < JD <
2460216.5. This cut on JD minimizes the bias in this
analysis from transient alerts which BTSbot trained on
and instances where BTSbot’s actions, which are visible
to scanners, influenced scanners’ decisions. Some very
long-lived sources, like certain AGN, do have alerts in
our training data and in this cleaned present-day sample. We do not remove these sources because they are
encountered by BTSbot in production, and thus should
be accounted for in this analysis.
We begin this analysis by applying the cleaning cuts
described in Sec. 2 on the public alerts that passed the
BTS filter with 2460175.5 < JD < 2460216.5. After
cuts, this sample totals 4,031 alerts from 251 bright transients and 15,159 alerts from 1,652 non-bright transients.
Figure 9 shows that the production BTSbot model yields
96.2% accuracy and ROCAUC=0.988 on the presentday sample. TP rate and TN rate are 91.9% and 97.4%,
True label
BTS
not-BTS
4.2. Performance on very recent BTS candidates
97.4%
2.6%
8.1%
91.9%
not-BTS
BTS
Predicted label
Figure 9. Same as Figure 6 for a sample of alerts from very
recent BTS candidates. The results of the ROC (presentday: thick green; test split: narrow orange), the ROCAUC,
and the confusion matrix are all very similar to their test
split analogs. All metrics are marginally improved for the
present-day sample but not significantly so. These suggest
that no data shift has occurred that significantly decreases
BTSbot’s performance.
respectively. The resulting performance is very similar
to the metrics computed from test split data in Sec. 4.1
and shown in Figure 7. Here, we observe marginally
higher performance across all alert-based metrics than
in the test split results. These variations are most likely
due to the relatively small size of the present-day sample
and are not indicative of a data shift affecting BTSbot’s
performance.
As in Sec. 4.1, any source in junk or having only one
alert after cleaning is removed when computing policy
completeness and purity. In Sec. 2, the vars query re-
=== PAGE 15 ===
15
100%
Saving
Triggering
90%
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
80%
Completeness
17.0
17.5
Purity
18.0
Peak magnitude
18.5 −15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
Days after action by scanner
Figure 10. Same as Figure 7 for a sample of very recent BTS candidates. Left: The completeness (dash-dot navy) and purity
(solid orange) curves are perfect in most bins. The overall purity of bts p1 and bts p2 are 81.0% and 92.0% respectively.
Contamination unique to bts p1 is almost entirely real SNe with mpeak slightly greater than 18.5, acceptable false positives.
The relatively low purity in two bins is due to small number statistics. Right: Both distributions still peak very near to zero.
Likely due to differences in the cuts creating the input samples, ∆tsave (0.0525 days) and ∆ttrigger (1.01 days) are larger than
test split equivalents.
ceived alert thinning down to Nmax = 100 alerts per
source. We emulate this by thinning sources classified
on Fritz or manually identified as an AGN, CV, or QSO
down to their latest Nmax = 100 alerts. We run all public alerts passing our Sec. 2 cleaning cuts from all sources
through both policies and select only the sources which
satisfy bts p1 or reach their peak magnitude between
2460175.5 < JD < 2460216.5. This representatively
simulates the actions BTSbot would have taken during
this time period should it have been fully operational.
Similar to Figure 7, Figure 10 shows the completeness, purity, and speed comparison of the production
BTSbot model on the present-day BTS sample. Both the
completeness and purity curve, shown in the left panel,
are at or near 100% in most peak magnitude bins. The
overall completeness is 98.7%. This remains near-perfect
and supports BTSbot’s ability to scan without imposing
significant selection biases into the BTS sample. Variations in either curve are due to small number statistics;
there are 0-3 FPs and FNs in each bin shown. Overall bts p1 purity is 81.0%, and overall bts p2 purity
is 92.0%. Similar to the test split results, the sources
selected by bts p1 but not bts p2 are dominated by
SNe with mpeak slightly dimmer than 18.5 mag (19/22
sources): non-problematic FPs because they are typically triggered on by BTS. The completeness and purity
estimates of the present-day sample are very similar to
their test split analogs, ≤ ±4% difference in all three
metrics, further suggesting that no data shift has affected BTSbot’s performance.
The right panel of Figure 10 compares BTSbot’s speed
to act with that of the human scanners on our present-
day sample. The medians of ∆tsave and ∆ttrigger are
larger than their test split counterparts: 0.0525 days
and 1.01 days respectively. We attribute this increase
to two main factors. (i) We have excluded ZTF partnership data from the present-day sample, but scanners
typically view data from both the ZTF public and partnership observations when scanning. This frequently
provides them with additional detections for BTS candidates, which BTSbot is blinded from, aiding in more
quickly identify bright transients. (ii) The present-day
sample is very small, so the median is volatile to changes.
There are just is 65 sources with ∆tsave values in the
present-day sample, while there were > 250 sources for
the test split. The shapes of the ∆t distributions, however, is consistent between the present-day and test split
analysis. Together, these suggest that the differences
observed are not due to a data shift but rather to differences in the sample characteristics and in how the
experiments were conducted.
With a sample of BTS candidates contiguous in time,
we can now easily compute the median number of saves
and triggers performed by BTSbot per night. Over the 41
nights in the present-day sample, 184 sources satisfied
bts p1. This is a median of ∼ 4.5 sources per night
which would have been saved and sent to SEDM.
4.2.1. Analysis of misclassifications in present-day sample
Analogously to Sec. 4.1.1, we investigate the types of
sources which BTSbot misclassifies in the present-day
sample.
Our policies select 35 FPs and 2 FNs. Similarly to
the test split results, the majority of FPs (19/35) are
=== PAGE 16 ===
16
real dim transients. The other FPs are again dominated
by CVs and AGN but do include other sources like asteroids. One of the FNs (ZTF23aaxtplp) has an extremely bright host galaxy and is projected very near to
its nucleus. The other FN (ZTF23abeuope) shows two
bright stars overlapping the host galaxy and projected
very near to the supernova. It is not certain that these
properties caused these sources to receive low scores, but
they are clearly very uncommon.
As is the case for the test split, the majority of the
misclassifications in the present-day sample, dim SNe,
have little negative consequence for BTS.
5. DISCUSSION
5.1. Integration of BTSbot into ZTF and the BTS
workflow
BTSbot has been deployed in Kowalski to enable running in real-time on incoming alert packets from IPAC’s
alert-producing and brokering system.
Kowalski performs three distinct operations on every alert packet. First, it separates the alert packet
from its prv candidates field (a 30-day history of detections and non-detections) to concatenate it to the
full list of prv candidates from all previous alerts with
the same objectId. This forms a full light curve for a
given ZTF object. The product of this concatenation
is then used to compute the custom metadata features
BTSbot takes as input (see Sec. 2 for list and definitions). Kowalski then cross-matches every alert with
a large number of catalogs such as the NASA Extragalactic Database15 (NED), CLU (Census of the Local
Universe; Cook et al. 2019), Milliquas (Flesch 2019),
and others. Lastly, Kowalski runs several ML models: braai, the five ACAI classifiers (Duev & van der
Walt 2021), and BTSbot. The outputs of all models
are injected into the alert packet along with their corresponding version numbers allowing alert filters to use
this information when identifying candidate transients.
The enriched alert packets are then stored in a
non-relational database (MongoDB16 ), allowing users
to design custom, potentially complex, filters as pure
database queries for maximum flexibility. These filters,
including the BTS alert filter, run on every alert.
If an alert passes a filter, it will be sent as a candidate to Fritz, a SkyPortal instance that serves as
the ZTF collaboration’s Marshal. Two additional layers of filtering are applied to allow the automated saving and triggering of any instrument for which SkyPor-
tal has a corresponding application programming interface (API). The first filtering layer assesses if the candidate should be saved, and the second assesses whether
an instrument should be triggered for follow-up. Autotriggering is only run on sources which have passed the
auto-saving filter. In the case of BTSbot, two autosaving and auto-triggering filters implemented, one for
each of the policies bts p1 and bts p2.
Additional features are implemented in SkyPortal to
ensure that redundant triggers are not sent. A new,
automatic follow-up request is prevented if a source already has a spectum, a classification, or if the instrument has already been triggered for that source. Instruments like SEDM which can conduct both spectroscopic
and photometric observations get additional rules to define whether the new trigger is redundant with an existing one. Some teams direct scanners to maintain lists
of sources that frequently pass their alert filter but are
not of interest, e.g. the junk set (see Sec. 2). These
can optionally be used to prevent a source from being auto-saved. The payload used for triggering an instrument, which contains the triggering instructions like
the priority for SEDM, is set in advance alongside the
Kowalski auto-triggering filter, but the priority assigned
to a target can be dynamically increased as new alerts
are posted. In particular, a source triggered on after
passing bts p1 can have its payload updated to priority
2 if it passes bts p2 before the trigger is completed.
When auto-saving or auto-triggering actions are
taken, comments recording these actions are posted to
the relevant source page on Fritz. Beyond bookkeeping, this is crucial to facilitate scanners working alongside BTSbot by displaying BTSbot’s actions in the same
interface where manual scanning is performed. Seamless
integration with the tools that scanners already rely on
enables joint-working that is more efficient and more reliable than either separately. This also allows scanners
to modify triggers sent by BTSbot, for example, increasing the trigger’s priority or adding photometry to the
request. These make real automated triggers safer and
more dependable, making the automated aspects of BTS
more easily monitored. The results from the SEDM observations and associated data products are uploaded
back to Fritz for visualization.
BTSbot saved 296 sources to an internal BTS catalog while running in production during October 2023,17
and 92.6% of these were confirmed as extragalactic tran17 An older version of BTSbot (v1.0) was running in production dur-
15 https://ned.ipac.caltech.edu/
16 https://www.mongodb.com
ing October 2023. The production model presented here (v1.0.1)
corrects for the sources with mpeak ≤ 18.5 in the dims query (see
Sec. 2). Both versions yield nearly identical performance.
=== PAGE 17 ===
17
sients. SN 2023tyk (ZTF23abhvlji) is a Type Ia supernova that was identified and triggered on by BTSbot.
The data collected by SEDM was then reduced by
pySEDM (Rigault et al. 2019), the spectrum classified
as belonging to a Type Ia SN by SNIascore (Fremling et al. 2021), and the classification automatically reported to TNS. As detailed by Rehemtulla et al. (2023b),
SN 2023tyk is the first transient to be fully automatically detected, identified, spectroscopically classified,
and publicly reported. As of December 2023, more
than a dozen additional Type Ia SNe have been both
triggered on by BTSbot and spectroscopically classified
by SNIascore: SN 2023vcz, SN 2023uxa, SN 2023uti,
SN 2023vcx, SN 2023uty, SN 2023vtp, SN 2023vpd,
SN 2023vip, SN 2023vwz, SN 2023wts, SN 2023xms,
SN 2023xhc, SN 2023xkq.
Operating BTSbot and SNIascore alongside each
other allows for the full-automation of a significant
amount of day-to-day tasks in BTS. About 70% of bright
transients found by BTS are Type Ia supernovae (Fremling et al. 2020), nearly all of which we expect to be
identified by BTSbot and 80-90% of which will be classified and reported to TNS by SNIascore. If no human scanning took place, this BTS workflow could fullyautomatically handle more than half of the bright transients in consideration by BTS. In practice, there are
additional tasks which remain to be automated or made
more efficient. Namely, scanning also involves the retrieving host galaxy redshifts from NED and classifications from TNS. We expect that much of these processes
can be automated and planning for doing so is underway. While a comprehensive transition to automated
scanning for BTS is unlikely (and not necessarily desirable), these tools mitigate the dependence of BTS operations on the natural fluctuations of scanners’ lives.
Further, a reallocation of some human effort invested in
BTS is possible when many tasks are automated. BTS
experts are able to spend more time, e.g., analyzing bulk
properties of SN samples or searching for rare or very
young events.
these models in architecture (indeed, some aspects of
BTSbot are inspired by them), but they are quite different in application.
The real-time stamp classifier predicts which one of
five high-level classes (SN, AGN, VarStar, asteroid, bogus) the source in a ZTF alert belongs to. This is done,
primarily, with the goal of automatic and rapid identification of SNe. To this end, the stamp-classifier is
trained exclusively on the first alert packet from a given
source. While rapid identification of SNe is an interest of
ours (see Sec. 5.3), we instead train BTSbot to function
on any alert packet from relevant ZTF sources. This
grants BTSbot the extra utility of being able to identify SNe at any phase of their evolution, albeit with the
additional complications associated with doing so.
The ACAI framework, a union of five independent binary classifiers, predicts which of five phenomenological
features (hosted, orphan, nuclear, variable star, bogus)
characterizes the source in a ZTF alert packet. These
models are trained on any alert from any ZTF source
and thus learn a much broader domain than BTSbot.
Narrowing the input domain of our model reduces its
broader utility relative to ACAI but unlocks greater performance for our particular task.
Unlike BTSbot, neither the stamp classifier nor ACAI
learn class definitions that are sensitive to the source’s
brightness. BTSbot must learn to select just a subset of
extragalactic transients, those with mpeak ≤ 18.5 mag,
and reject other extragalactic transients and all other
sources. While BTSbot performs binary classification,
effectively marginalizing over all non-bright transient
classes, the stamp classifier performs five-class classification and the ACAI models perform five binaryclassifications. This requires these other models, the
stamp classifier in particular, to learn more discriminatory information between its five classes. This is not
necessary for BTSbot because our primary interest is automating BTS scanning, for which only bright transients
are relevant. Thus, we can justify combining non-bright
transients into a single class, simplifying BTSbot’s task.
5.2. Comparison with similar models
5.3. An adaptation of BTSbot: Automatic, very rapid
follow-up
18
The ALeRCE (Automatic Learning for the Rapid
Classification of Events; Förster et al. 2021) real-time
stamp classifier (Carrasco-Davis et al. 2021) and the
ACAI (Alert-Classifying Artificial Intelligence; Duev &
van der Walt 2021) framework are other image- and extracted feature-based MM-CNNs that perform classification on ZTF alert packets. BTSbot is very similar to
18 https://alerce.online/
The development of BTSbot and the design of our policies prioritized completeness of bright transients over
other metrics like purity and speed. After operating in
production for a few months a different set of policies
was implemented, which are focused on increasing purity to operate BTSbot with minimal intervention. These
priorities are directed by the needs of BTS, but applications of a BTSbot-like model to other science efforts
could prefer to prioritize other metrics.
=== PAGE 18 ===
18
BTSbot’s architecture is particularly well suited for the
automated identification of very young transients. At
early times (i.e., the night of the first detection), the
source’s light curve is uninformative because it is comprised of a very small number of data points. Instead,
much of the information available on the new transient
is embedded in associated images. In this regime, one
would expect that an image-based model, like BTSbot,
would have better access to constraining information
than a purely light-curve based model.
We take SN 2023ixf as an example illustrative of the
additional discovery potential of a model like BTSbot.
SN 2023ixf was a Type II SN in Messier 101. Owing to its proximity, it provided a unique laboratory
to study pre-supernova mass loss events of red supergiants, allowed the assembly of a comprehensive timedependent description of the event, and much more (e.g.;
Bostroem et al. 2023; Hiramatsu et al. 2023; JacobsonGalán et al. 2023; Qin et al. 2023; Zimmerman et al.
2023). SN 2023ixf was reported to TNS by Koichi Itagaki at 21:42 UTC on 19 May 2023 (Itagaki 2023). The
earliest published spectrum was collected less than an
hour later by Perley et al. (2023). About 14 hours before the first TNS report, SN 2023ixf was detected by
ZTF, and, just minutes later, this alert packet was assigned a bright transient score of 0.840 by an early version of BTSbot.19 A variant of BTSbot could be trained
to isolate such sources. With an alert filter and policy suited for the search of young transients, this could
have allowed for a more rapid identification and spectroscopic follow-up of SN 2023ixf. About half the observing night was remaining for SEDM at the time the
first detection would have passed the auto-triggering filters, enough time to obtain a spectrum if triggered at
high enough priority. If the spectrum is collected near
the end of observing that night at Palomar Observatory (∼12:00 UTC), this represents a ∼10 hour speedup over the otherwise earliest spectrum obtained. In
this example, BTSbot and the associated integration
tools presented here allow the probing of early, rapidlyevolving explosion physics typically unavailable to traditional triggering methods.
There are a number of challenges related to this adaptation of BTSbot. Namely, the BTS alert filter and the
bts p1 and bts p2 policies presented here would likely
be inappropriate or sub-optimal following this new definition of the model’s priorities. A thorough exploration
of how to best assemble a training set for this goal would
also be required.
19 The early version of BTSbot referenced here (v0.3) is presented
in Rehemtulla et al. 2023a.
Automatic spectroscopic follow-up of infant SNe in
ZTF data has been successfully implemented before in
AMPEL (Nordin et al. 2019). Target selection was driven
by SNGuess (Miranda et al. 2022), a decision tree-based
ML system for identifying SNe. Their automated triggering was designed to observe nearby infant SNe, which
was successfully done for a number of sources.
BTSbot’s source code and the production
BTSbot model are publicly available on GitHub (https:
//github.com/nabeelre/BTSbot). This repository includes all codes necessary for assembling BTSbot’s training set, training the model, creating figures visualizing
validation or test split performance, and more. It is
written specifically with adaptability and flexibility in
mind. Additional functionalities, e.g. training models
with alternative architectures (see Appendix B), are
embedded in the scripts with minimal added complexity and no repeated code. This is done to facilitate
ease in recycling the BTSbot code-base for other applications. One could, for example, quickly explore solving
a problem with a simple fully-connected neural network
and later advance to a MM-CNN with powerful features like data augmentation and Weights and Biases
hyperparameter sweeps integration already built-in. We
encourage the use of this resource by the community.
6. SUMMARY
We have presented BTSbot, a new multi-modal convolutional neural network to automate scanning for the
ZTF Bright Transient Survey. BTSbot uses ZTF image cutouts and metadata to produce a bright transient
score for an individual ZTF alert packet. It achieves
∼95% accuracy on input alerts and identified 100% of
bright transients in our test split with 93% purity. Performance compares very closely to that of human scanners in terms of completeness, purity, and speed to act
on new transients. BTSbot only falls slightly short of
scanners in terms of purity of the bright transient sample it produces: 93% vs. ∼ 97%. We also perform an
additional analysis with very recent BTS candidates to
demonstrate that BTSbot is not impacted by a significant data shift.
BTSbot has been fully integrated into Kowalski
and Fritz, ZTF’s first-party alert broker and marshal, and now automatically sends spectroscopic followup requests for the new bright transients it identifies.
BTSbot joins a family of automation tools in the BTS
workflow (braai, sgscore, pySEDM, and SNIascore)
which aid in running BTS efficiently. These models,
coordinated by Fritz and Kowalski, have enabled the
first fully automatic detection, identification, spectroscopic classification, and public reporting of a transient:
=== PAGE 19 ===
19
SN 2023tyk. This milestone represents a boost in efficiency for BTS and an image of what time-domain astronomy could look like during the Rubin-era. It also
hints towards the discovery potential of adapting similar technology to other areas of time-domain astronomy.
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
A great number of people have contributed to BTS
and BTS scanning over the years. We thank the following people who have saved 10 or more sources to internal BTS catalogs on Fritz as of October 2023: Ivan Altunin, Raphael Baer-Way, Pallas A. Beddow, Ofek Bengiat, Joshua S. Bloom, Ola Bochenek, Emma Born, Kate
Bostow, Victoria Mei Brendel, Rachel Bruch, Vidhi
Chander, Matthew Chu, Elma Chuang, Aishwarya
Dahiwale, Asia deGraw, Dmitry Duev, Kingsley Ehrich,
Eli Gendreau-Distler, Nachiket Girish, Xander Hall, KRyan Hinds, Ido Irani, Cooper Jacobus, Connor Jennings, Joel Johansson, Snehaa Ganesh Kumar, Michael
May, William Meynardie, Shaunak Modak, Kishore Patra, Neil Pichay, Sophia Risin, Yashvi Sharma, Gabrielle
Stewart, Nora Linn Strotjohann, James Sunseri, Edgar
Vidal, Jacob Wise, Abel Yagubyan, Yoomee Zeng, and
Erez A. Zimmerman.
We also thank Jakob Nordin for discussions relating
to AMPEL.
The material contained in this document is based
upon work supported by a National Aeronautics and
Space Administration (NASA) grant or cooperative
agreement. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this material are those of
the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of
NASA. This work was supported through a NASA grant
awarded to the Illinois/NASA Space Grant Consortium.
This research was supported in part through the computational resources and staff contributions provided for
the Quest high performance computing facility at Northwestern University which is jointly supported by the Office of the Provost, the Office for Research, and Northwestern University Information Technology.
Based on observations obtained with the Samuel
Oschin Telescope 48-inch and the 60-inch Telescope at
the Palomar Observatory as part of the Zwicky Transient Facility project. ZTF is supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grants No. AST-1440341
and AST-2034437 and a collaboration including current partners Caltech, IPAC, the Oskar Klein Center at
Stockholm University, the University of Maryland, University of California, Berkeley , the University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee, University of Warwick, Ruhr University, Cornell University, Northwestern University and
Drexel University. Operations are conducted by COO,
IPAC, and UW.
SED Machine is based upon work supported by the
National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1106171
The Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, through
both the Data-Driven Investigator Program and a dedicated grant, provided critical funding for SkyPortal.
N. Rehemtulla and A. A. Miller are partially supported by LBNL Subcontract NO. 7707915.
M. W. Coughlin acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation with grant numbers PHY2308862 and PHY-2117997.
SRK thanks the Heising-Simons Foundation for supporting his research.
Facilities: PO:1.2m, PO:1.5m
Software: Astropy (Astropy Collaboration et al.
2013, 2018), corner (Foreman-Mackey 2016), Jupyter
(Kluyver et al. 2016), Keras (Chollet et al. 2015), Matplotlib (Hunter 2007), NumPy (Harris et al. 2020), pandas (pandas development team 2020; Wes McKinney
2010), penquins (Duev et al. 2021), scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al. 2011), SciPy (Virtanen et al. 2020), SkyPortal (van der Walt et al. 2019; Coughlin et al. 2023),
Tensorflow (Abadi et al. 2015), tqdm (da Costa-Luis
2019), and the Weights and Biases platform (Biewald
2020)
=== PAGE 20 ===
20
APPENDIX
A. ACCURACY AND LOSS EVOLUTION DURING TRAINING
Accuracy
96%
92%
88%
α = 1e-04
84%
24
Train
Validation
4e-05 2e-05 6e-06
0
25
50
0
25
50
75
100
75
100
125
150
125
150
Production model
Other trails
22
Loss
20
18
16
14
12
Epochs
Figure 11. Accuracy (top) and loss (bottom) for the final BTSbot models (production model: bold curve; other trials: narrow
curves) of the train (blue) and validation (green) splits during training as a function of epoch. Gray vertical lines indicate
epochs at which the learning rate decreased. The discrepancies in these metrics between the train and validation splits cannot
be interpreted as overfitting alone because they are partially due to differences in alert thinning and class weighting.
Figure 11 shows how the accuracy and loss evolve during the training of the final BTSbot models, including the
production model. Differences in how the Nmax alert thinning is applied between train and validation (see Sec. 2) and
the use of class weights during training can explain much of the difference between their respective loss curves. Thus,
the train loss being significantly lower than validation loss cannot be interpreted as overfitting. There does appear to
be overfitting in the production model (bold curves) past epoch ∼30, evidenced by the validation loss beginning to
increase while the train loss continues to decrease. We avoid this by selecting the model that produced the minimum
validation loss during training, rather than the model from the final epoch of training. Figure 11 marks the epochs
where the learning rate decreased due to a plateau in the validation loss as vertical gray lines. The learning rate
decreases three times, spanning from α = 10−4 to α = 6 × 10−6 . We also observe that the selected production model is
not the model that produced the least validation loss or had the greatest validation accuracy. The production model
is selected by considering best performance in policy-based metrics, those most relevant to how BTSbot is used.
Training this production model took ∼32 hours on an Intel Xeon 6230 CPU, and inference on a single alert packet
takes less than a hundredth of a second on a laptop CPU.
B. COMPARISON WITH UNI-MODAL ARCHITECTURES
An exploration of simpler, alternative architectures and a characterization of their performance is necessary to justify
BTSbot’s chosen multi-modal architecture. We present alert- and policy-based performance metrics produced by two
uni-modal model architectures: a uni-modal convolutional neural network (UM-CNN) and a fully-connected neural
=== PAGE 21 ===
21
Table 5. Architectures of uni-modal BTSbot alternatives
Uni-modal convolutional neural network
Layer type
2D Convolution
2D Convolution
Max pooling
Dropout
2D Convolution
2D Convolution
Max pooling
Dropout
Flattening
Dense
Dropout
Dense
Layer parameters
64 filters, 3 × 3 kernel
64 filters, 3 × 3 kernel
2 × 2 kernel
0.45
16 filters, 3 × 3 kernel
16 filters, 3 × 3 kernel
4 × 4 kernel
0.65
128 units
0.45
1 unit
Fully-connected neural network
Layer type
Batch normalization
Dense
Dropout
Dense
Dense
Dropout
Dense
Layer parameters
64 units
0.40
64 units
64 units
0.70
1 unit
Note—Layer parameters of alternative BTSbot architectures: uni-modal convolutional
neural network (left two columns) and fully-connected neural network (right two
columns). Optimal hyperparameters are determined by large hyperparameter sweeps.
Table 6. Performance metrics of uni-modal BTSbot alternatives
Architecture type
NN
UM-CNN
MM-CNN
Alert-based metrics
Policy-based metrics
Accuracy
ROCAUC
Completeness
bts p1 purity
bts p2 purity
∆tsave
∆ttrigger
95.5%
82.4%
94.9%
0.988
0.902
0.985
99.8%
94.3%
100.0%
82.8%
69.5%
84.6%
91.2%
92.5%
93.0%
-0.0400 days
-0.0485 days
-0.0381 days
-0.0200 days
-0.0174 days
-0.0147 days
Note—Comparison of performance metrics on test split data across three different model architectures: a fully-connected
neural network (NN), a uni-modal convolutional neural network (UM-CNN), and a multi-modal convolutional neural network
(MM-CNN). Each network is the highest performing in at least one metric. The UM-CNN is less complete than the MM-CNN
and both the NN and the UM-CNN fall short of the MM-CNN in purity. Overall, the MM-CNN is the best performing
architecture.
network (NN). These networks perform inference using only images and only metadata respectively. The training data,
image preprocessing, and feature extraction are, where relevant, performed identically for all three architectures. The
ordering and types of layers of the uni-modal architectures are identical to those of the multi-modal architecture with
the other branch entirely removed. The hyperparameters of the layers, the Adam optimizer, and the value of Nmax
are searched over in a Bayesian hyperparameter sweep similarly to the sweeps executed for the MM-CNN.
Table 5 shows the optimal layer hyperparameters for either architecture. Compared to the MM-CNN’s convolutional
branch, the UM-CNN has smaller convolutional kernels and a much larger dense layer following the flattening. The
UM-CNN’s first two convolutional layers have more filters than the final two convolutional layers, whereas the pattern
is reversed for the MM-CNN. We also find that the optimized UM-CNN has batch size = 32, and Adam parameters
β1 = β2 = 0.999. Compared to the MM-CNN’s metadata branch, the optimized NN has half as many neurons in
the first two dense layers but eight times as many in the third layer. We also find that the NN performs best with
batch size = 128, Adam parameters β1 = β2 = 0.999, and Nmax = 30. The hyperparameter values which are not
explicitly mentioned can be assumed to be identical to that of the MM-CNN.
=== PAGE 22 ===
22
Table 6 compares test split performance metrics from each of the three architectures. The NN slightly outperforms
the MM-CNN in the alert-based metrics while the UM-CNN falls well short of the others. The UM-CNN presented here
uses the full-size image cutouts, but Appendix C shows that slightly increased performance can be realized through
the reduction of input image’s size. In policy-based metrics, the MM-CNN’s marginal advantage in completeness over
the NN is due to having just a single fewer FN. The MM-CNN demonstrates a larger advantage in purity, however. Its
advantage is ∼ 0.5 − 2% over the others in bts p2 purity; even small boosts in purity are valuable when applied over
the large samples and baselines in consideration by BTS. Each model performs very similarly in the speed metrics,
although the NN and the UM-CNN marginally outperform the others in ∆ttrigger and ∆tsave respectively.
Each architecture outperforms the others in some metrics, but the MM-CNN delivers the best overall performance.
It delivers the highest completeness and purity while sacrificing well less than an hour in ∆tsave/trigger .
Despite having worse purity than the MM-CNN, there is still valuable utility in the NN because we find that it
trains ∼ 60 times faster than the MM-CNN. This discrepancy in training time is partially due to the NN adopting
Nmax = 30 instead of Nmax = 100 as the MM-CNN does, and could be also decreased by training the MM-CNN on a
GPU. These factors aside, the NN would very likely remain many factors quicker to train, and it is thus better suited
for experimenting with adapting BTSbot to alternative use cases. In developing adaptations of BTSbot, being able
to very quickly design and execute experiments will be key. Excluding images may also lend advantages in the ease
of transferring BTSbot adaptations to other surveys, for example, LSST or the upcoming La Silla Schmidt Southern
Survey (LS420 ). Although effort has been made to develop survey-agnostic CNNs (e.g., Cabrera-Vives et al. 2023),
BTSbot is not designed or expected to perform consistently on image data from other surveys. Instead, one could more
easily design a NN which exclusively uses survey-agnostic features, increasing its potential impact by allowing it to be
applied more widely.
C. CONVOLUTIONAL NEURAL NETWORKS WITH CROPPED IMAGE CUTOUTS
The properties of the image cutouts produced by large wide-field surveys are critical to a number of the survey’s
functions. While the pixel scale, typically measured in arcseconds (”) per pixel, is a fixed property of the telescope’s
optics, many choices can be made in software that determine the nature of the cutouts sent to alert brokers. One must
choose the angular and pixel size of the cutouts in light of the pixel scale and whether or not to decrease resolution
by binning the pixels. A tension arises because scanners generally prefer having more information, i.e. cutouts with
higher resolution and greater angular size, but the surveys producing and disseminating the alerts prefer minimal
network bandwidth costs, i.e. lower resolution and smaller angular size. Smaller cutouts with less information may
compromise the performance of these key ML models, however, possibly reducing the scientific potential of the entire
survey. Only a small number of studies developing CNNs for large wide-field surveys comment on performance over a
range of cutout sizes (e.g.; Killestein et al. 2021; Carrasco-Davis et al. 2021; Reyes-Jainaga et al. 2023). It remains to be
seen, then, what the minimum cutout size is to maintain acceptable performance with current CNNs. Adding further
complexity, CNNs performing different tasks will be impacted differently by reduced cutout sizes, and MM-CNNs may
be more resilient to reduced cutout sizes due to the availability of metadata information. Multi-scale cutouts, where
resolution progressively decreases moving away from the cutout center, are a compelling alternative because they
dramatically increase the available field-of-view without an increase to the data volume of the cutouts (Reyes-Jainaga
et al. 2023). Further study of (MM-)CNN performance over a range of cutout sizes is necessary to better characterize
their correlation.
To explore this important issue, we train multiple UM-CNN versions of BTSbot to identify which cutout size produces
the most accurate model. We create new training sets from BTSbot’s original training set by keeping only the innermost
Npix × Npix pixels of each cutout and renormalizing them individually. We train ∼30-60 trials of BTSbot with a given
value of Npix (3, 5, 7, 13, 21, 35, or 49) in Bayesian hyperparameter sweeps similar to Section 3.1 and Appendix B.
These trials are unlikely sufficient to yield optimal hyperparameters, but they do give a representative view of the
performance for each value of Npix . For models with Npix ≤ 13, we remove the pooling layers entirely to maintain the
image’s size through the hidden layers.
Figure 12 presents the highest performing models judged by accuracy on the test set. We find that the Npix = 49
UM-CNN yields the best performance, and that both the Npix = 49 and Npix = 35 UM-CNNs marginally outperform
20 https://www.snowmass21.org/docs/files/summaries/CF/
SNOWMASS21-CF6 CF4 Peter Nugent-171.pdf
=== PAGE 23 ===
23
Test set accuracy
85%
80%
75%
357
13
21
35
49
63
Cutout side length [pixels]
Figure 12. Test set accuracy of BTSbot UM-CNNs as a function of input image cutout size. Very small cutouts (3 × 3 to 13 × 13
pixels) clearly under-perform relative to models with larger cutouts (35 × 35 to 63 × 63 pixels). The highest performing model is
notably not that which uses the full-size images but rather the model which uses 49 × 49 pixel cutouts. Cropping cutouts could
allow for the significant decrease of a survey’s data rate and possibly network bandwidth costs, in this case, with no decrease in
the performance of ML-based transient detection tools.
the UM-CNN with uncropped cutouts (Npix = 63). It is not unambiguously clear what the reason for this is from this
simple experiment alone, however, these results suggest that information ∼ 0.5′ away from the source in question tends
to be irrelevant or noisy when performing our task. We notably do not observe the same trend for the MM-CNN,
where the Npix = 63 model is the highest performing. Carrasco-Davis et al. (2021) find that the ALeRCE stamp
classifier (a MM-CNN), performs best with Npix = 21 cutouts. Together, this indicates that more work is necessary
to better understand the optimal cutout size for upcoming surveys.
The Npix = 35 model roughly matches the Npix = 63 model in accuracy but has 352 /632 ≈ 30% the number of pixels.
In this case, shrinking cutouts dramatically quickens BTSbot’s training without compromising performance. Shrinking
cutouts survey-wide is an option to reduce a survey’s network bandwidth costs significantly as image cutouts typically
comprise a large fraction of the bytes in an alert packet. Although 35 × 35 cutouts are appropriate for BTSbot,
such small cutouts may reduce scanners’ ability to distinguish sources of different types. Experiments of this sort
are most relevant to the alert stream design of upcoming surveys like LSST and LS4. LSST’s planned alert packet
cutout size is at least 30 × 30 pixels21 at a pixel scale of 0.2”/pixel (Ivezić et al. 2019), thus spanning 6” on a side.
The Npix = 5 and Npix = 7 models are nearest to this in terms of field-of-view, however, ZTF’s much larger pixel
scale (1”/pixel) makes this an unreasonable comparison. Further study is required to assess how small cutouts can
be without compromising, e.g., real/bogus performance at LSST-like resolutions. LS4 will have a pixel scale very
similar to that of ZTF, but, at the time of writing, the alert packet cutout size is undetermined (R. Knop, private
communications). These results provide the preliminary guidance that LS4 cutouts should be no smaller than 21 × 21
in order to maintain the performance of BTSbot-like UM-CNN models.
REFERENCES
Abadi, M., Agarwal, A., Barham, P., et al. 2015,
Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Sipőcz, B. M.,
TensorFlow: Large-Scale Machine Learning on
et al. 2018, AJ, 156, 123, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aabc4f
Heterogeneous Systems. https://www.tensorflow.org/
Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J.,
et al. 2013, A&A, 558, A33,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201322068
Bailey, S., Aragon, C., Romano, R., et al. 2007, ApJ, 665,
1246, doi: 10.1086/519832
Bellm, E. C., Kulkarni, S. R., Graham, M. J., et al. 2019a,
PASP, 131, 018002, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aaecbe
Bellm, E. C., Kulkarni, S. R., Barlow, T., et al. 2019b,
21 https://dmtn-102.lsst.io
PASP, 131, 068003, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ab0c2a
=== PAGE 24 ===
24
Biewald, L. 2020, Experiment Tracking with Weights and
Biases. https://www.wandb.com/
Blagorodnova, N., Neill, J. D., Walters, R., et al. 2018,
PASP, 130, 035003, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aaa53f
Bloom, J. S., Richards, J. W., Nugent, P. E., et al. 2012,
PASP, 124, 1175, doi: 10.1086/668468
Boone, K. 2019, AJ, 158, 257,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab5182
Bostroem, K. A., Pearson, J., Shrestha, M., et al. 2023,
ApJL, 956, L5, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/acf9a4
Breiman, L. 2001, Machine Learning, 45, 5,
doi: 10.1023/A:1010933404324
Brink, H., Richards, J. W., Poznanski, D., et al. 2013,
MNRAS, 435, 1047, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt1306
Cabrera-Vives, G., Bolivar, C., Förster, F., et al. 2023,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2308.07538,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2308.07538
Cabrera-Vives, G., Reyes, I., Förster, F., Estévez, P. A., &
Maureira, J.-C. 2017, ApJ, 836, 97,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/836/1/97
Carrasco-Davis, R., Reyes, E., Valenzuela, C., et al. 2021,
AJ, 162, 231, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac0ef1
Carrasco Kind, M., & Brunner, R. J. 2013, MNRAS, 432,
1483, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt574
Chollet, F., et al. 2015, Keras, https://keras.io
Cold, C., & Hjorth, J. 2023, A&A, 670, A48,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202244867
Cook, D. O., Kasliwal, M. M., Sistine, A. V., et al. 2019,
The Astrophysical Journal, 880, 7,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab2131
Coughlin, M. W., Bloom, J. S., Nir, G., et al. 2023, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2305.00108,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2305.00108
da Costa-Luis, C. 2019, The Journal of Open Source
Software, 4, 1277, doi: 10.21105/joss.01277
Dekany, R., Smith, R. M., Riddle, R., et al. 2020, PASP,
132, 038001, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ab4ca2
Dieleman, S., Willett, K. W., & Dambre, J. 2015, MNRAS,
450, 1441, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv632
Domı́nguez Sánchez, H., Huertas-Company, M., Bernardi,
M., Tuccillo, D., & Fischer, J. L. 2018, MNRAS, 476,
3661, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty338
Duev, D., Shin, K. M., & Singer, L. 2021,
dmitryduev/penquins: a python client for
dmitryduev/kowalski, v2.1.2, Zenodo,
doi: 10.5281/zenodo.5651471
Duev, D. A., & van der Walt, S. J. 2021, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2111.12142, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2111.12142
Duev, D. A., Mahabal, A., Masci, F. J., et al. 2019,
MNRAS, 489, 3582, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz2357
Flesch, E. W. 2019, VizieR Online Data Catalog, VII/283
Foreman-Mackey, D. 2016, The Journal of Open Source
Software, 1, 24, doi: 10.21105/joss.00024
Förster, F., Cabrera-Vives, G., Castillo-Navarrete, E., et al.
2021, AJ, 161, 242, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abe9bc
Fremling, C., Miller, A. A., Sharma, Y., et al. 2020, ApJ,
895, 32, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab8943
Fremling, C., Hall, X. J., Coughlin, M. W., et al. 2021,
ApJL, 917, L2, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac116f
Fukushima, K., & Miyake, S. 1982, Pattern Recognition,
15, 455, doi: 10.1016/0031-3203(82)90024-3
Gagliano, A., Contardo, G., Foreman Mackey, D., Malz,
A. I., & Aleo, P. D. 2023, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2305.08894. https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.08894
Goldstein, D. A., D’Andrea, C. B., Fischer, J. A., et al.
2015, AJ, 150, 82, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/150/3/82
Gomez, S., Berger, E., Blanchard, P. K., et al. 2020, ApJ,
904, 74, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abbf49
Gomez, S., Villar, V. A., Berger, E., et al. 2023, ApJ, 949,
113, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acc535
Goobar, A., Johansson, J., Schulze, S., et al. 2023, Nature
Astronomy, 7, 1137, doi: 10.1038/s41550-023-02034-5
Graham, M. J., Kulkarni, S. R., Bellm, E. C., et al. 2019,
PASP, 131, 078001, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ab006c
Harris, C. R., Millman, K. J., van der Walt, S. J., et al.
2020, Nature, 585, 357–362,
doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2
Hendrycks, D., & Gimpel, K. 2016, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1610.02136, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1610.02136
Hiramatsu, D., Tsuna, D., Berger, E., et al. 2023, ApJL,
955, L8, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/acf299
Hosseinzadeh, G., Dauphin, F., Villar, V. A., et al. 2020,
ApJ, 905, 93, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abc42b
Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing in Science and Engineering,
9, 90, doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55
Irani, I., Prentice, S. J., Schulze, S., et al. 2022, ApJ, 927,
10, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac4709
Itagaki, K. 2023, Transient Name Server Discovery Report,
2023-1158, 1
Ivezić, Ž., Kahn, S. M., Tyson, J. A., et al. 2019, ApJ, 873,
111, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab042c
Jacobson-Galán, W. V., Dessart, L., Margutti, R., et al.
2023, ApJL, 954, L42, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/acf2ec
Kaiser, N., Aussel, H., Burke, B. E., et al. 2002, in Society
of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE)
Conference Series, Vol. 4836, Survey and Other Telescope
Technologies and Discoveries, ed. J. A. Tyson & S. Wolff,
154–164, doi: 10.1117/12.457365
Kasliwal, M. M., Cannella, C., Bagdasaryan, A., et al.
2019, PASP, 131, 038003, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aafbc2
=== PAGE 25 ===
25
Killestein, T. L., Lyman, J., Steeghs, D., et al. 2021,
MNRAS, 503, 4838, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab633
Kim, Y. L., Rigault, M., Neill, J. D., et al. 2022, PASP,
134, 024505, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ac50a0
Kingma, D. P., & Ba, J. 2014, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1412.6980, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1412.6980
Kluyver, T., Ragan-Kelley, B., Pérez, F., et al. 2016, in IOS
Press, 87–90, doi: 10.3233/978-1-61499-649-1-87
Lanusse, F., Ma, Q., Li, N., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 473, 3895,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx1665
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., & Hinton, G. 2015, Nature, 521,
436, doi: 10.1038/nature14539
Mahabal, A., Rebbapragada, U., Walters, R., et al. 2019,
PASP, 131, 038002, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aaf3fa
Masci, F. J., Laher, R. R., Rusholme, B., et al. 2019,
PASP, 131, 018003, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aae8ac
McCulloch, W. S., & Pitts, W. 1943, The Bulletin of
Mathematical Biophysics, 5, 115, doi: 10.1007/bf02478259
Miranda, N., Freytag, J. C., Nordin, J., et al. 2022, A&A,
665, A99, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202243668
Morgan, R., Nord, B., Bechtol, K., et al. 2022, ApJ, 927,
109, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac5178
—. 2023, ApJ, 943, 19, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac721b
Muthukrishna, D., Narayan, G., Mandel, K. S., Biswas, R.,
& Hložek, R. 2019, PASP, 131, 118002,
doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ab1609
Nair, V., & Hinton, G. E. 2010, in Proceedings of the 27th
International Conference on International Conference on
Machine Learning, ICML’10 (Madison, WI, USA:
Omnipress), 807–814
Nordin, J., Brinnel, V., van Santen, J., et al. 2019, A&A,
631, A147, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201935634
pandas development team, T. 2020, pandas-dev/pandas:
Pandas, latest, Zenodo, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.3509134
Pasquet, J., Bertin, E., Treyer, M., Arnouts, S., & Fouchez,
D. 2019, A&A, 621, A26,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201833617
Patterson, M. T., Bellm, E. C., Rusholme, B., et al. 2019,
PASP, 131, 018001, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aae904
Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., et al. 2011,
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12, 2825
Perley, D. A., Gal-Yam, A., Irani, I., & Zimmerman, E.
2023, Transient Name Server AstroNote, 119, 1
Perley, D. A., Fremling, C., Sollerman, J., et al. 2020, ApJ,
904, 35, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abbd98
Qin, Y.-J., Zhang, K., Bloom, J., et al. 2023, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2309.10022, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2309.10022
Rehemtulla, N., Miller, A. A., Coughlin, M. W., & Jegou
du Laz, T. 2023a, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2307.07618,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2307.07618
Rehemtulla, N., Miller, A., Fremling, C., et al. 2023b,
Transient Name Server AstroNote, 265, 1
Reyes-Jainaga, I., Förster, F., Muñoz Arancibia, A. M.,
et al. 2023, ApJL, 952, L43,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ace77e
Rigault, M., Neill, J. D., Blagorodnova, N., et al. 2019,
A&A, 627, A115, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201935344
Rodrı́guez, Ó., Maoz, D., & Nakar, E. 2023, ApJ, 955, 71,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ace2bd
Sadeh, I., Abdalla, F. B., & Lahav, O. 2016, PASP, 128,
104502, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/128/968/104502
Shappee, B. J., Prieto, J. L., Grupe, D., et al. 2014, ApJ,
788, 48, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/788/1/48
Sharma, Y., Sollerman, J., Fremling, C., et al. 2023, ApJ,
948, 52, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acbc16
Sharon, A., & Kushnir, D. 2022, MNRAS, 509, 5275,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab3380
Simonyan, K., & Zisserman, A. 2014, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1409.1556, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1409.1556
Smith, K. W., Smartt, S. J., Young, D. R., et al. 2020,
PASP, 132, 085002, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ab936e
Sollerman, J., Yang, S., Perley, D., et al. 2022, A&A, 657,
A64, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202142049
Stein, R., Mahabal, A., Reusch, S., et al. 2023, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2312.00139,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2312.00139
Stoppa, F., Bhattacharyya, S., Ruiz de Austri, R., et al.
2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2307.14456,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2307.14456
Szegedy, C., Zaremba, W., Sutskever, I., et al. 2013, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:1312.6199, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1312.6199
Tachibana, Y., & Miller, A. A. 2018, PASP, 130, 128001,
doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aae3d9
Tonry, J. L. 2011, PASP, 123, 58, doi: 10.1086/657997
Tonry, J. L., Denneau, L., Heinze, A. N., et al. 2018, PASP,
130, 064505, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aabadf
Tsaprazi, E., Jasche, J., Goobar, A., et al. 2022, MNRAS,
510, 366, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab3525
Turpin, D., Ganet, M., Antier, S., et al. 2020, MNRAS,
497, 2641, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa2046
van der Walt, S. J., Crellin-Quick, A., & Bloom, J. S. 2019,
Journal of Open Source Software, 4, 1247,
doi: 10.21105/joss.01247
van Roestel, J., Duev, D. A., Mahabal, A. A., et al. 2021,
AJ, 161, 267, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abe853
Villar, V. A., Berger, E., Miller, G., et al. 2019, ApJ, 884,
83, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab418c
Villar, V. A., Hosseinzadeh, G., Berger, E., et al. 2020,
ApJ, 905, 94, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abc6fd
=== PAGE 26 ===
26
Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T. E., et al. 2020,
Nature Methods, 17, 261, doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2
Walmsley, M., Ferguson, A. M. N., Mann, R. G., & Lintott,
C. J. 2019, MNRAS, 483, 2968,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty3232
Walmsley, M., Smith, L., Lintott, C., et al. 2020, MNRAS,
491, 1554, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz2816
Wes McKinney. 2010, in Proceedings of the 9th Python in
Science Conference, ed. Stéfan van der Walt & Jarrod
Millman, 56 – 61, doi: 10.25080/Majora-92bf1922-00a
Wright, D. E., Smartt, S. J., Smith, K. W., et al. 2015,
MNRAS, 449, 451, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv292
Yang, S., Sollerman, J., Strotjohann, N. L., et al. 2021,
A&A, 655, A90, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202141244
Zimmerman, E. A., Irani, I., Chen, P., et al. 2023, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2310.10727,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2310.10727
=== PAGE 27 ===
