=== PAGE 1 ===
Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. main
December 2, 2024
©ESO 2024
Transient classifiers for Fink
Benchmarks for LSST
B.M.O. Fraga1⋆ , C.R. Bom1,2 , A. Santos1 , E. Russeil3 , M. Leoni4 , J. Peloton4 , E.E.O. Ishida3 , A. Möller5,6 ,
and S. Blondin7,8
1
Centro Brasileiro de Pesquisas Físicas, Rua Dr, Xavier Sigaud 150, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Centro Federal de Educação Tecnológica Celso Suckow da Fonseca, Rodovia Márcio Covas, lote J2, Itaguaí, Brazil
3
Université Clermont-Auvergne, CNRS, LPCA, 63000, Clermont-Ferrand, France
4
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS/IN2P3, IJCLab, 15 rue Georges Clemenceau, 91405 Orsay, France
5
Centre for Astrophysics and Supercomputing, Swinburne University of Technology, Mail Number H29, PO Box 218,
31122 Hawthorn, VIC, Australia
6
ARC Centre of Excellence for Gravitational Wave Discovery (OzGrav), John St, Hawthorn, VIC 3122, Australia
7
Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, CNES, LAM, Marseille, France
8
European Southern Observatory, Karl-Schwarzschild-Straße 2, Garching, D-85748, Germany
arXiv:2404.08798v2 [astro-ph.IM] 29 Nov 2024
2
ABSTRACT
Context. The upcoming Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST) at the Vera C. Rubin Observatory is expected to
detect a few million transients per night, which will generate a live alert stream during the entire ten years of the survey.
This stream will be distributed via community brokers whose task is to select subsets of the stream and direct them
to scientific communities. Given the volume and complexity of the anticipated data, machine learning (ML) algorithms
will be paramount for this task.
Aims. We present the infrastructure tests and classification methods developed within the Fink broker in preparation
for LSST. This work aims to provide detailed information regarding the underlying assumptions and methods behind
each classifier and enable users to make informed follow-up decisions from Fink photometric classifications.
Methods. Using simulated data from the Extended LSST Astronomical Time-series Classification Challenge (ELAsTiCC), we showcase the performance of binary and multi-class ML classifiers available in Fink. These include tree-based
classifiers coupled with tailored feature extraction strategies as well as deep learning algorithms. Moreover, we introduce the CBPF (Centro Brasileiro de Pesquisas Físicas) Alert Transient Search (CATS), a deep learning architecture
specifically designed for this task.
Results. Our results show that Fink classifiers are able to handle the extra complexity that is expected from LSST data.
CATS achieved ≥ 93% precision for all classes except ‘long’ (for which it achieved ∼ 83%), while our best performing
binary classifier achieves ≥ 98% precision and ≥ 99% completeness when classifying the periodic class.
Conclusions. ELAsTiCC was an important milestone in preparing the Fink infrastructure to deal with LSST-like data.
Our results demonstrate that Fink classifiers are well prepared for the arrival of the new stream, but this work also
highlights that transitioning from the current infrastructures to Rubin will require significant adaptation of the currently
available tools. This work was the first step in the right direction.
Key words. methods: data analysis – surveys – supernovae:general
1. Introduction
The advent of large-scale sky surveys has forced astronomy to enter the era of big data, with current experiments
already producing data sets that challenge traditional analysis techniques (Hilbe et al. 2014). In this context, machine
learning (ML) methods are almost unavoidable (e.g. Bamford et al. 2009; Baron 2019; Bom et al. 2022). For timedomain astronomy, the ability to quickly process data and
obtain meaningful results has become critical due to current and upcoming projects such as the Zwicky Transient
Facility (ZTF; Bellm et al. 2019) and the Vera C. Rubin Observatory Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST; Ivezić
et al. 2019), respectively. As will be the case for LSST, the
ZTF project employs a difference imaging analysis pipeline
⋆
e-mail: bernardo@cbpf.br
that streams to community brokers, in the form of alerts,
every detection above a given signal-to-noise threshold.
Brokers are subsequently tasked with filtering and
analysing the data in detail, selecting the most promising
objects for different science cases, and redirecting them to
different research communities. Fink (Möller et al. 2021) is
one of the official LSST brokers that has been selected to receive the raw alert stream from the beginning of LSST’s operations,1 which are expected to start in 2025. In the meantime, broker systems are operating and being tested with
alerts from ZTF. Fink ingests and processes the stream,
making use of several different science modules that contain cross-matching capabilities, ML classifiers, and user1
The other selected brokers are ALERCE (Förster et al. 2021),
AMPEL (Nordin et al. 2019), ANTARES (Matheson et al. 2021),
Babamul, LASAIR (Smith et al. 2019), and Pitt-Google.
Article number,page 1 of 19
=== PAGE 2 ===
A&A proofs: manuscript no. main
specified filters (for details on Fink see Möller et al. 2021,
and references therein).
The experience accumulated in the past few years in
Fink with ZTF has been paramount for the design, development, and fine-tuning of the broker services according to
the needs of different scientific communities. Beyond the
scientific results already reported (see, e.g., Aivazyan et al.
2022; Kuhn et al. 2023; Carry et al. 2024; Karpov & Peloton 2022), this partnership has enabled the development of
a series of tools specifically designed to deal with the alert
stream (Leoni et al. 2022; Biswas et al. 2023a; Russeil et al.
2022; Allam et al. 2023; Le Montagner et al. 2023; Biswas
et al. 2023b; Karpov & Peloton 2023; Moller & Main de
Boissiere 2022). Nevertheless, given the volume and complexity of the expected data, restructuring algorithms to
transition from ZTF to LSST is a non-trivial task.
Fortunately, there have been similar situations in the
past from which important lessons were learned. The astronomical transient community has a long-standing tradition of preparing for the arrival of data from a new survey
by producing detailed light curve simulations and hosting
data challenges. The SuperNova Photometric Classification
Challenge (SNPCC; Kessler et al. 2010) consisted of simulated data representing three supernova classes (Ia, Ibc,
and II) whose light curve properties and rate were built to
mimic the then upcoming Dark Energy Survey2 (DES; Dark
Energy Survey Collaboration et al. 2016). The challenge
was open to professional astronomers, and received answers
from ten different research groups. Despite not identifying
a single classifier as being significantly better than the others and even when considering the undeniable differences
between the generated simulations and the data finally observed by DES, the challenge was of crucial importance to
prepare the necessary tools for the upcoming telescope.
This successful experience led to the development of
a second simulated data set, this time in preparation for
the arrival of LSST. The Photometric LSST Astronomical
Time-series Classification Challenge3 (PLAsTiCC, Hložek
et al. 2023) was proposed to the general public and received more than 1000 submissions. The data set enclosed
14 different transient classes in the training sample and
15 in the target sample.4 Many algorithms were able to
achieve similar results, while the numerically best ranked
solution used data augmentation and boosted decision trees
(Boone 2019). Beyond the official results presented within
the time frame of both competitions, the most enduring
legacy of both challenges has been the data sets they produced, which were subsequently used for the development
of numerous methods and tools (e.g. Alves et al. 2022; Qu
& Sako 2022; Malz et al. 2023; Allam et al. 2023, to cite a
few).
All of these efforts constitute the astronomical branch of
ML exploring ‘transfer learning’ (Pan & Yang 2010; Eriksen
et al. 2020), a strategy commonly employed when labels are
rare or expensive. It consists of training ML models in one
domain (simulations) and using it to leverage information
from the target one (real data). The most recent sample of
photometrically classified supernova Ia from DES (Möller
2
https://www.darkenergysurvey.org/
3
https://www.kaggle.com/c/PLAsTiCC-2018
4
The extra class was intended to test the resilience of algorithms to anomalous observations.
Article number,page 2 of 19
et al. 2024) was identified following this approach (Möller
& de Boissière 2019).
Nevertheless, in all the previous attempts, simulations
were generated in the format of full static light curves. The
task of on-the-fly classification of nightly detected transient
candidates had yet to be approached. The Extended LSST
Astronomical Time-Series Classification Challenge5 (ELAsTICC; Knop & ELAsTiCC Team 2023), developed by the
LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration (DESC) was created to allow for a concrete assessment of the performance
of different stages of the communication pipeline. This includes simulating an alert stream to be received by brokers,
the ingestion and analysis of the alerts using ML-based classifications by the broker teams, and reporting back such
scores to DESC. Recently, one of the instances of this data
set was used by Cabrera-Vives et al. (2024) to test a multiclass classifier using transformers and by Khakpash et al.
(2024) in the study of stripped-envelop supernovae. In this
work, we use the first version of the ELAsTiCC data set,
streamed between September 2022 and January 20235 in
alert format, to stress test the performance of the entire
Fink infrastructure in an LSST-like data scenario.
This paper is organised as follows: In Sect. 2, we present
the data set, its properties, and our chosen experiment design. Sect. 3 presents with more details how Fink works,
showing the preparations for LSST. Sect. 4 presents the
metrics we used to evaluate the classifiers. Sect. 5 gives
more details about the construction and training of ML
models, while Sect. 6 presents an evaluation of these models on a blind test set. We show how some classifiers can be
combined to improve stand-alone performances in Sect. 7,
and Sects. 8 and 9 contain discussions and our conclusions,
respectively.
2. The ELAsTiCC data set
The Extended LSST Astronomical Time-series Classification Challenge (Knop & ELAsTiCC Team 2023) was designed to test broker systems and classification algorithms
when applied to a state-of-the-art data set that mostly resembles LSST alerts. It emerged from the experiences accumulated during two previous challenges, SNPCC (Kessler
et al. 2010) and PLAsTiCC6 (Hložek et al. 2023), and it is
lead by LSST DESC. Its first objective was to test the brokers infrastructure capability of ingesting and processing a
real-time alert stream. The second goal was to enable the
evaluation of ML classification algorithms.
In the first instance of the challenge (hereafter ELAsTiCCv1), two different simulated data sets were provided: a
static set of full light curves (one light curve per astrophysical source) was made available in 18 May 2022 and an alert
stream corresponding to three years of LSST operations
was streamed between September 2022 and January 2023.
Both data sets were simulated using SuperNova ANAlysis package (SNANA; Kessler et al. 2009) and contained
19 classes divided into five broad categories7 (SN-like, periodic, non-periodic, long, and fast). Light curves, comprising
detections and forced photometry in the LSST broad-band
5
https://portal.nersc.gov/cfs/lsst/DESC_TD_PUBLIC/
ELASTICC/
6
https://www.kaggle.com/c/PLAsTiCC-2018
7
Full taxonomy can be found at https://github.com/
LSSTDESC/elasticc/blob/main/taxonomy/taxonomy.ipynb
=== PAGE 3 ===
B.M.O. Fraga et al.: Transient classifiers for Fink
filters {u, g, r, i, z, Y } were provided (for details on how the
simulation was generated we refer to the project website5 ).
In order to isolate the performance of our classifiers, avoid
issues due to the data generating process and circumvent
the need to transform full light curves into alerts, we chose
to use here only the streamed data set.8 In this format,
each alert holds the photometric information obtained at
a given day, as well as the previous photometric history of
that point in space. Thus, at each new light curve point, a
new alert is generated that differs in one point from previous alerts from that same source.
We selected one third of all unique objects as training sample for all our algorithms (1 417 375 distinct objects
corresponding to 17 214 758 alerts). The remaining objects
were used as a test set to evaluate the performance of
our classifiers (2 874 008 distinct objects corresponding to
34 891 855 alerts).
The class distributions for the alerts in our train and
test sets are shown in Figs. 1 (unique classes) and 2 (broad
classes). We note that in our experiment design, the population distributions between classes are similar in both samples, with supernova types Ia (SNIa) and II (SNII) comprising almost half of the alerts, and the fast class being
the least represented one. Overall, the distributions for the
unique and broad classes are extremely imbalanced, which
could pose a problem for multi-class classifiers.
Each alert package included both, light curve data (mjd,
fluxcal, fluxcal_err, band-pass filter: filtername) as
well as object metadata, comprised of properties such as
position, Milky Way extinction and estimated photometric redshift, among others. In Fig. 3 we show the distributions for two of these properties for the training and test
set: the Milky Way extinction (mwebv, left) and photometric host galaxy redshift (hostgal_zphot, right). Approximately 91% of the objects in the training and test sets have
a photometric redshift available. The distributions are similar, with both photometric redshift distributions displaying
a double peaked structure.
Fig 4 shows the distribution of number of detection
points per alert with and without forced photometry (left),
as well as the global number of detection points in each
bandpass (right), for the training (top) and test (bottom)
sets. It can be seen from the left panel that the distribution of light curve sizes considering only the detections is
strongly peaked around 10 detections, dropping heavily after that, with very few alerts having more than 50 measurements in both the training and test sets. Including forced
photometry, the peak is still present around 10 detections,
although less pronounced; the decrease is also less steep, as
expected. Overall, the distribution is similar for both sets,
with the majority of alerts having less than 50 points, even
including forced photometry.
The distribution of detections per passband (right column of Fig. 4) is similar for the training and test sets: the
redder the band, the larger the maximum number of detections. The exception to this is the z band, which do not
appear in longer light curves. This is especially important
for classifiers that rely on colours or use only specific passbands. Nevertheless, this feature is a direct consequence of
the chosen survey strategy, and it is reasonable to expect
that the real data will also hold differences in number of
detections on each band. Thus, it is paramount to assess
the robustness of classifiers in this scenario.
3. Fink infrastructure
Since 2019, Fink has been processing alert data from the
ZTF public stream. Not only the ZTF data rate is lower
than the one intended for LSST, but the schema and content of the alert packets from each stream are also different.
Therefore, the ELAsTiCC challenge was an opportunity to
show that the Fink architecture can scale in terms of data
volume and that it is possible adapt the current classifiers,
or create new ones, to a new schema with different incoming
information.
Fink operates in real time on large-scale computing infrastructures. For the ZTF processing, the incoming data
stream is provided by the ZTF Alert Distribution System
(ZADS; Patterson et al. 2018) that runs a Kafka instance on
the DigitalOcean cloud infrastructure (USA). Fink is currently deployed on the VirtualData9 cloud infrastructure
(France), and makes use of distributed computing to split
the incoming stream of alerts into smaller chunks of data
to be analysed independently over many machines in parallel. For LSST, Fink will be deployed at CC-IN2P3 (Centre
de Calcul de l’Institut National de Physique Nucléaire et
de Physique des Particules), which will have a local copy
of LSST data that can be efficiently exploited for internal
cross-match needs.
What is deployed for ZTF typical rates (of the order
of 200,000 alerts per night can be easily scaled to ELAsTiCC rates (of the order of 1,000,000 alerts in a few hours
every night) by adding more machines. In practice for the
challenge, we use a total of 33 cores for all operations (listening to the incoming stream, processing it and sending
back results). Moreover, the processing was done on the
same platform, alongside the real-time processing of ZTF
alerts.
For the ELAsTiCC challenge, Fink operations consisted
in three steps, done in real time: (1) decoding the incoming
alert stream, (2) applying all classifiers on every alert, and
(3) redistributing all enriched alert packets to the DESC
team in the USA. The first and last steps are under the
responsibility of the Fink engineering team, while the second part involves classifiers provided by the community of
users. The development of science models within Fink is
completely driven by the user community10 , who is responsible for development and validation of its outputs. Each
team responsible for a classifier typically provides a pretrained model, as well as the snippet of code necessary to
run the inference on one alert11 , and the Fink engineering
team integrates it into Fink for streaming processing at
scale.
Given the large volume of data, we developed a new
service for the community during the challenge, the Fink
Data Transfer service.12 The ELAsTiCC training set was
9
https://virtualdata.fr/
Users can propose science modules following instructions at
https://fink-broker.org/joining/
11
The Fink engineer team provides examples to manipulate
8
A second version, ELAsTiCCv2, was released in mid-2023, alert data, and all code and models can be found online at
with updates in photometric redshift model and cadence. The https://github.com/astrolabsoftware/fink-science.
12
second version was not used in this work.
https://fink-portal.org/download
10
Article number,page 3 of 19
=== PAGE 4 ===
A&A proofs: manuscript no. main
Fig. 1: ELAsTiCC class distribution for our training (dark blue) and test (orange) sets.
Fraction of Alerts
0.6
Train
0.577 0.576
Test
0.5
0.4
0.325 0.326
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.072 0.073
SN like
Periodic
Non-periodic
0.023 0.023
Long
0.003 0.003
Fast
Fig. 2: ELAsTiCC broad class distribution for our training
(dark blue) and test (orange) sets.
made available via this service, which enables easy distribution of large volumes of data for many decentralised users.
It also allows users to select any observing nights, apply
selection cuts based on alerts content, define the content
of the output, and stream data directly anywhere. Since
the start of the challenge, more than one billion alerts have
been streamed via this service.
For the experiments described in this work, nine classifiers were deployed (see Sect. 5). Some of the classifiers
used in the challenge are also classifiers used to process the
ZTF alert stream. The differences in data rate, schema and
the data itself (available filter bands, cadence and magnitude limit, among others) between the ZTF stream and
the simulated ELAsTiCC data made the transition less
easy than we had originally anticipated. From this point
of view, the lessons learned from the ELAsTiCC challenge
were paramount in preparing for the arrival of the LSST
alert stream.
Throughout the classifier design phase and the challenge itself, we monitor classifier performance in terms of
throughput (alerts processed/second/core) and memory usage (MB/core). LSST will impose stringent requirements on
throughput (we expect a continuous flow of 10,000 alerts
per exposure, i.e. every 30 seconds), while our computing
infrastructure imposes constraints on memory usage (cores
with 2 GB RAM each). As an example, while processing in
real-time the first version of the challenge (using 24 cores in
parallel), 82.2% of alerts were classified in less than 30 seconds (the time between when an alert enters Fink and when
it is fully classified by the nine classifiers), 90.5% in less than
a minute, and over 99.9% in less than 10 minutes. Delays
larger than expected are partly due to processing (classifier
Article number,page 4 of 19
versions and performance have evolved over time), but the
high values are mainly explained by human intervention in
the computing infrastructure, which interrupted operations
while we were processing live data. These interventions are
not expected during normal LSST operations. Regular measurements of Fink operations performance (profiling) are
analysed to check that requirements are met.
4. Metrics
In a classification task, several metrics can be used to assess
the performance of the classifier, such as the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) and precision-recall curves and
the confusion matrix. These are built from the precision
(P), recall (R, also called the true positive rate, or TPR),
and false positive rate (FPR), which in a binary classification are defined as
TP
,
TP + FP
TP
R=
TP + FN
FP
,
FPR =
FP + TN
P=
(1)
with TP(N) the number of true positives (negatives) and
FP(N) the number of false positives (negatives). Precision
can be understood as the purity of the predictions, while
Recall is its completeness or efficiency, and the FPR is the
ratio of wrongly classified objects of the negative class (also
known as the false alarm rate). The output of a binary classifier is a the probability of a light curve belonging to the
class of interest. Thus, the quantities on Eq. 1 will depend
on a chosen probability threshold. By varying this threshold, one can obtain curves for recall versus FPR (ROC) and
precision versus recall. The area under these curves (AUC)
can be used as a metric to assess the performance of the
classifier, where a perfect classifier would have an AUC of
1, and an AUC of 0.5 for the ROC corresponds to a random
classifier.
The binary case can be straightforwardly extended to
the multi-class case by using a one versus all approach,
wherein the problem is split into a binary classification case
per class, gathering every class except one as the negative
=== PAGE 5 ===
B.M.O. Fraga et al.: Transient classifiers for Fink
101
Train
Test
Train
Test
100
Frequency
Frequency
100
10 1
10 2
10 1
10 3
10 4
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Milky Way extinction
2.5
3.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Host redshift
2.0
2.5
3.0
Fig. 3: Distribution of milky way extinction (left) and host galaxy photometric redshift (right) for the training (dark
blue) and test (orange) sets.
class. In this case, there will be a ROC and a precision-recall
curve for every single class.
Anther popular metric for classification task is the
confusion matrix, a square matrix showing the number
(or percentage) of objects classified in every combination
true/predicted class. Both metrics are used to access the
efficiency of classifiers described in this work.
5. Classifiers in Fink
For this work, we used 4 algorithms for classification. These
are meant to represent the two possible applications of the
broker infrastructure: broad classifiers using deep learning
(DL), represented by CATS (Sect. 5.1) and SuperNNova
(Sect. 5.2), and binary classifiers using feature extraction
and tree-based algorithms, represented by the Early SNIa
(Sect. 5.3) and the SLSN (Sect. 5.4) classifiers.
The class specific classifiers (Sects. 5.3 and 5.4) represent the most common scenarios in which a team interested
in a specific class can profit from the broker infrastructure.
As an example, we used a tool that incorporates physical
assumptions about thermodynamic behaviour of the transient (Russeil, E. et al. 2024) in combination with traditional ML algorithms. The same infrastructure can be used
to incorporate other requests coming from science teams.
5.1. CATS
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are a class of models
adapted to work with sequential data. They do so by constructing hidden states that carry information from the
previous part of the sequence (Rumelhart & McClelland
1987; Schmidt 2019). One of the main problems found
in training RNNs was the vanishing gradients: When the
input sequence was long, the successive derivatives during backpropagation tended to erase the gradient (Bengio et al. 1994), which then cause later time steps to be
‘disconnected’ from earlier ones (i.e. a low memory capacity). Long-short term memory units (LSTM; Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber 1997) were designed to avoid the vanishing
gradient problem by keeping not only a hidden state but
also a memory state across all time steps. By using gates,
the network can learn what information needs to be kept,
removed, or inserted to the memory vector, increasing the
RNN’s memory capacity.
The CBPF Alert Transient Search (CATS) was built by
starting with a base network very similar to the Multivariate LSTM Fully Convolutional Network (MLSTM-FCN;
Karim et al. 2019), using squeeze and excitation blocks;
we use bidirectional LSTM layers and a series of fully connected layers before the output, adding a dropout layer after each of those. This architecture was shown to perform
very well in several different time series tasks13 , and the
base architecture is shown in Fig 5. We then performed a
hyperparameter search using keras-tuner, searching for the
best configuration of number of convolutional, LSTM and
Dense blocks, convolutional filters, LSTM and Dense layers’ units and activation functions. This search was done
using a subset of 10% of the unique objects in our training
sample to speed up the process. The final architecture consisted of one convolutional block with 32 filters, two bidirectional LSTM layers with 400 and 500 units respectively,
and two fully connected layers with 64 and 96 units. All
convolutional and fully connected layers are followed by a
Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation.
Our inputs were the normalised flux and errors, (where
both are normalised per light curve), and the difference in
days from the first available light curve data point for that
transient and the current alert detection, using forced photometry when available. To that, the filter was added as
an integer in the range [1, 6] corresponding to the LSST
passbands, [u, g, r, i, z, Y ]. All inputs were right-padded
to match the longest light curve, so that the shape of the
input is (395, 4) (top-right box in Fig. 5). To this, we concatenated the Milky Way extinction (mwebv), host galaxy
redshift (hostgal_zphot), and the redshift of the transient
(z_final), when available, plus their errors (Input metadata) before passing the result to the fully connected layers.
Using these features gave the best results when testing with
a smaller subset of the data, slightly better than using only
extinction and redshift of the host.
13
See
https://paperswithcode.com/task/
time-series-classification for benchmarks on several
different time series tasks.
Article number,page 5 of 19
=== PAGE 6 ===
A&A proofs: manuscript no. main
Train
Detections
Detections and forced photometry
5
4
3
2
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Number of points per alert
i
z
Y
80
100
106
105
104
102
350
Detections
Detections and forced photometry
Number of alerts
0.6
0.4
20
40
60
Number of detections
u
g
r
107
1.0
0.8
0
108
Test
1.2
0.2
0.0
Train
u
g
r
103
1
0
Number of alerts (×107)
107
Number of alerts
Number of alerts (×106)
6
106
Test
i
z
Y
105
104
103
102
101
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Number of points per alert
350
400
100
0
20
40
60
Number of detections
80
100
Fig. 4: Distribution of light curve length in the training (top) and test (bottom) samples. On the left, the total number of
points including only detections (blue) and with forced photometry (orange). On the right, the distribution of detections
per filter.
We performed a K-fold cross-validation process to assess
the robustness of our model. It consists of splitting the data
into k groups (folds), and performing k iterations of training; at each iteration, one of the folds is used for validation,
while the other k − 1 are used for training.
We used five folds; the unique object identifier
(diaObjectId) was the parameter used to split the data,
thus making every light curve of a single object either part
of the training or validation set, with no contamination between them.
The model was trained for 15 epochs at each fold, with
the NAdam optimizer (Dozat 2016), on a cluster with eight
NVIDIA RTX A6000. At each fold, the model where the
validation loss was lowest was selected to perform the predictions. The architecture and training were implemented
using TensorFlow 2 (Abadi et al. 2015).
Table 1 shows the metrics derived from the validation
sets of the k-fold. The model performed satisfactorily, havArticle number,page 6 of 19
ing a mean ROC AUC above 0.95 for all classes, and a
mean precision-recall AUC above 0.8 except for the Long
class, with little variance between the folds. Although the
mean Precision for the Long class is approximately 80%, the
Recall is less than 50%, due to half of the Long alerts being classified as SN-like events. The major type behind this
confusion are Super luminous Supernovae (SLSN), which
could resemble some types of supernovae when looking at
short enough light curves. On the other hand, the 20% rate
of false positives of the Long class is dominated by SNII,
which is also the dominant subclass; however, contamination by SNIa (the second most dominant subclass) is negligible. SNII with an extended plateau can be very similar
to SLSNe, while SNIa are generally brighter and exhibit a
characteristic feature in redder passbands, thus rendering
their classification less controversial. Despite such caveats,
results shown in Table 1 confirm that CATS will be able to
=== PAGE 7 ===
B.M.O. Fraga et al.: Transient classifiers for Fink
Fig. 5: Illustration of the CATS architecture.
provide reliable classification results even under challenging
data scenarios.
Table 1: CATS results for the validation sample across all
folds.
SN-like
Fast
Long
Periodic
NonPeriodic
ROC
AUC
0.99
(0.0001)
PR
AUC
0.99
(0.0002)
0.97
(0.0022)
0.99
(0.0013)
0.99
(0.0013)
0.96
(0.0012)
1.00
(0.00001)
1.00
(0.00003)
0.80
(0.047)
0.68
(0.0041)
1.00
(0.00003)
1.00
(0.0005)
0.85
(0.092)
0.82
(0.032)
1.00
(0.0002)
0.97
(0.003)
0.72
(0.017)
0.47
(]0.041)
1.00
(0.0001)
0.96
(0.005)
Precision Recall
Notes. Reported are the means with standard deviations in
parentheses. ROC AUC and PR AUC are the area under the
curve for the ROC and precision-recall curves, respectively, while
the values for the precision and recall are taken from the confusion matrix averaged over all folds.
5.2. SuperNNova
SuperNNova (SNN; Möller & de Boissière 2019) is a DL
light curve classification framework based on RNNs. SNN
makes use of fluxes over different band-passes and their
measurement uncertainties over time for classification of
time-domain candidates in different classes. Additional information such as host-galaxy redshifts and Milky Way extinction and their errors can be included to improve performance.
SuperNNova includes different classification algorithms, such as LSTM RNNs and two approximations for
Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs). Here, we only use the
LSTM architecture, which was also used for classification
of type Ia SNe (SNe Ia) in the Dark Energy Survey (Möller
et al. 2022, 2024). For work on BNNs in the context of
Rubin see Moller & Main de Boissiere (2022).
We used the LSTM RNN to process the photometric
time series and produce a sequence of hidden states. The
sequence is condensed to fixed length through mean pooling. Finally, a linear projection layer was applied to obtain
an N- dimensional vector, where N is the number of classes.
A softmax function was used to obtain probabilities for an
input to belong to a given class. During training, we randomly truncated light curves to improve the robustness of
the classifier with partial light curves. SNN is trained to
optimize accuracy of balanced classes.
We grouped observations in each passband within a
given night. If a given filter is not observed, we assigned
it a special value to indicate that it is missing. To deal with
irregular time sampling, we added a delta time feature to indicate how much has elapsed since the last observation. We
used the default configuration of SNN with the normalisation as in (Möller et al. 2022) and added redshift and Milky
Way extinction as additional features for this work.
Classification probabilities from SNN can be used to
select a sample by performing a threshold cut or by weighting the contribution of candidates by their classification
score (Vincenzi et al. 2023, 2024; DES Collaboration et al.
2024). In this work we evaluated only the selection of samples using a probability cut set to p > 0.5 or in multi-class
classification, the largest probability for all classes.
We trained binary and broad class models. For the binary classification, we balanced the training set light curve
numbers between the target class and other classes (randomly sampled). For the broad classifier we did also a balanced training set. However, the fast, long and non-periodic
classes have considerably smaller numbers than the SN and
periodic classes as shown in Fig. 2; the balanced training
set for broad classification was ≈ 2, 000 events per class.
We split the data set in 80% for training, 10% for validation and 10% for performance evaluation. In Table 2,
we show the performance metrics for the different models
obtained for this test set.
For the broad model, we find that the lowest accuracy
classes are SNe and Long events. This may be due to the
time-range of the light curve provided for classification as
some Long events such as PISN and SLSNe during a reduced time range may resemble shorter time-scale SNe. We
also find small confusion between Fast and Periodic transients that may be due to the same effect.
For the binary models, we also find that the model targeting Long events has lower accuracies than the other binary classification models. This may be due to the small
data set used for training, which is composed of only thousands of light curves.
As expected, small and unbalanced training sets impact
the performance of this framework, which was built for accurate classification with large and representative training
sets. Further discussion on the performance of SuperNNova with respect to training set size can be found in
Möller & de Boissière (2019).
5.3. Early supernova Ia
Supernovae Ia (SNIa) were first used as standard candles in
cosmological analysis in the end of the 20th century, when
they provided the first evidence of the Universe’s current
Article number,page 7 of 19
=== PAGE 8 ===
A&A proofs: manuscript no. main
Table 2: SuperNNova results for a blind test sample.
Class
Accuracy
SN-like
Fast
Long
Periodic
Non-Periodic
Broad
95.58
98.15
84.58
99.93
99.4
88.52
ROC
AUC
0.9890
0.9958
0.9270
0.9999
0.9999
-
Precision
Recall
96.19
99.98
83.85
99.98
99.98
68.15
93.38
96.3
87.76
99.9
99.07
80.0
Notes. Results obtained on complete light curves using an independent test set from the training sample. All rows except the
last one show the metrics for a binary target versus other types.
accelerated expansion (Riess et al. 1998; Perlmutter et al.
1999). Since then, large efforts have been devoted to the
compilation of large SNIa samples, in the hope they can
help unravel details about the behaviour of dark energy
(e.g. Aleo et al. 2023; Möller et al. 2024).
Despite the undeniable impact large scale sky surveys
can imprint on SN cosmology results, such potential is
strongly dependent on our ability to distinguish SNIa from
other types of SN-candidates (see, e.g., Ishida 2019, and
references therein). In the context of real data, labelling is
an extremely expensive process and ideally we would like
to discover such transients early enough so they are still
sufficiently bright to allow spectroscopic classification.
For ZTF processing, Fink has an early supernova Ia
classifier (hereafter, EarlySNIa) based on independent feature extraction for each of the two ZTF passbands and a
random forest classifier enhanced by active learning (for a
complete description see Leoni et al. 2022). Its goal is to
identify SNIa before or at peak, to optimally allow spectroscopic follow-up resources to be allocated. The module
has been successfully reporting EarlySNIa candidates to the
Transient Name Server (TNS) since November/2020. However, in the context of LSST, with 3 times more passbands
and a considerable sparser cadence, the module required
significant modifications.
In order to allow classification with a lower number of
points per filter and, at the same time, take into account
colour information, we implemented the Rainbow multiband feature extraction method proposed by Russeil, E.
et al. (2024) to comply with the characteristics of the new
data set. A parametric model was simultaneously fitted to
the light curves in all available passbands, and the bestfit parameter values were used as features, thus given as
input to the random forest classifier (Ho 1995). Assuming the transient can be approximated by a black-body,
the framework combines temperature and bolometric light
curve models to construct a 2D continuous surface. This approach enables early description even when the number of
observations in each filter is significantly limited (for more
details see Russeil, E. et al. 2024).
The preprocessing for each alert included i) averaging
all observations within the same night; ii) removing any
intra-night flux measurements lower than -10 (FLUXCAL >
-10); iii) requiring a minimum of seven points per object,
in any filter, including forced photometry; and iv) ensuring
that intra-night flux measurements are consistently increasing within at least two passbands. Thus, considering that
only rising alerts survived such selection cuts, we described
Article number,page 8 of 19
Fig. 6: Example of light curve fit for an early SNIa performed with Rainbow. The estimated light curve behaviour in each filter (full lines) was found by using the
photometric history within alertId = 244687224069 (circles). The most recent observation within that alert (cross)
was added subsequently to illustrate the agreement between
the estimation and measured value in the z-band.
the bolometric evolution of our light curves with a logistic
function of the form
f (t) =
amplitude
,
t−t0
1 + exp(− rise_time
)
(2)
where rise_time is the characteristic time of rise,
amplitude is the amplitude, and t0 describes a reference
time that corresponds to the time at half of the rising
light curve. The temperature evolution was described with
a falling logistic function of the form
T (t) = Tmin +
delta_T
t−t0 ,
1 + exp k_sig
(3)
where delta_T is the full amplitude of temperature, Tmin
denotes the minimum temperature reached, k_sig describes a characteristic timescale, and t0 is a reference
time parameter that corresponds to the time at half of
the slope. We note that t0 from the bolometric and temperature descriptions is used as a single common parameter whose role is to anchor functional behaviour, but it
holds no physical meaning without a reference point, and
thus it was not included in our final parameter set. Beyond
these, Rainbow also returns a measurement of the quality
of the fit (reduced_chi2) and the maximum measured flux
(lc_max). Figure 6 illustrates the capability of the method
in extrapolating the behaviour of a rising light curve even
when the number of rising points is sparse. In this figure,
the model (full lines) was fit using only the history within
the alert (circles). The most recent observation (cross) was
added subsequently as a way to compare the measurement
with the prediction.
As a result, each alert is represented by seven values. To this we added the mean signal-to-noise ratio
=== PAGE 9 ===
B.M.O. Fraga et al.: Transient classifiers for Fink
(FLUXCAL/FLUXCALERR); the number of points in all passbands before intra-night smoothing14 (nobs); separation
between the host and the transient (hostgal_snsep) and
the host photometric redshift (host_photoz). Thus resulting in 11 parameters per alert.
A total of 5 334 911 alerts (791 779 objects) survived
selection cuts, which corresponds to ≈ 31% of the alerts in
the full training sample described in Sect. 2. Among them,
SNIa (≈ 34%), SNII (≈ 28%), RRLyrae (≈ 11%), Ibc (≈
8%) and AGN (≈ 8%) were the most frequent classes. From
these, we selected a sample of 205 228 alerts (30 000 objects)
for training a supervised ML model. In this sample, the
distribution of the major classes was unchanged. We note
that we report populations of individual classes to better
illustrate the composition of the sample, but in reality, we
trained a binary classifier whose positive class corresponded
to approximately a third of the full sample. The remaining
5 131 798 alerts (761 779 objects) were used for validating
the classifier results. To avoid an information leak, we made
sure to place all alerts from the same object either in the
training or in the validation sample.
We trained a random forest model using a scikit-learn
(Pedregosa et al. 2011) implementation, using 50 trees,
maximum depth of 15 and set the minimum number of
alerts per leaf to be 0.01 % of the training size. In the
validation sample, this resulted in P = 0.70/R = 0.70, considering a probability threshold of 0.5.
5.4. Superluminous supernovae
Superluminous supernovae (SLSN) are SNe whose peak optical luminosity exceeds −21 mag (see, e.g., Moriya et al.
2018 for a review). Their rise times can vary between ∼ 20
days to more than 100 days for some events, but their postmaximum decline rates are either consistent with 56 Co decay (at least initially), or significantly faster. This suggests
that some SLSN can have a possible thermonuclear origin,
which given the mass required can only be explained by
population III star origin. At such mass, a pair production
mechanism triggers and results in an instability that eventually leads to the collapse of the core, hence pair-instability
SNe (PISN). Currently, there have been no direct confirmation of their existence, although good candidates have been
reported (Moriya et al. 2022; Pruzhinskaya et al. 2022).
The discovery and characterisation of a PISN would significantly impact our understanding of the connection between
chemical evolution and structure formation in the Universe
(LSST Science Collaboration et al. 2009).
Given that predicted light curves of SLSNe and PISNe
can have a similar morphology, we use a common classifier
for both and call it the SLSN classifier. Its core implementation is based on a feature extraction of normalised alerts
followed by a random forest classification. For each filter we
computed the following set of features: maximum and standard deviation of the flux; mean signal-to-noise ratio and
number of points. We also added the following metadata
information: right ascension (ra), declination (dec), host
galaxy photometric redshift (hostgal_zphot), host galaxy
photometric redshift error (hostgal_zphoterr) and distance between the host and the transient (hostgal_snsep).
In addition, parametric fits of the light curves are computed
14
This number was obtained by counting the number of observations and each alert, not the corresponding metadata column.
and best-fit values are used as parameters. Similarly to Sect.
5.3, we used the Rainbow (Russeil, E. et al. 2024) framework to obtain a multi-passband description of the light
curves. In this context, the bolometric flux is modelled using the following three-parameter function:
f (t) = max (0, A(t − t0 ) × e
t−t0
−t
f all
),
(4)
which depends on amplitude (A), a time offset (t0 ) and a
characteristic time of decay (tf all ). We found this simple
functional form to be effective in classifying both SLSN-I
and PISN. This equation was obtained by applying the
Multi-View Symbolic Regression algorithm (Russeil et al.
2024) to real ZTF light curves from the SLSN candidate
SNAD16015 (Pruzhinskaya et al. 2023). The max operation
has been manually added to prevent negative fluxes. We
chose to model the temperature using Eq. 3, which enables
the description of cooling transients. An example of a SLSN
fit is shown in Fig. 7. It highlights the good agreement of
the blackbody approximation to SLSN observations. The
fit is performed using light-curve16 python package,
which internally uses iminuit minimising the negative log
likelihood. The optimised parameters and the loss are
included as features for the classifier. Thus we imposed
that alerts contain at least seven observed points. In total,
26 features are extracted for each alert.
The classifier was based on a scikit-learn random forest algorithm trained using the active learning (AL) procedure proposed in Leoni et al. (2022). This strategy allows
the classifier to focus on the relevant boundaries between
SLSN and similar transients rather than simply learning
the global distribution between very unbalanced classes.
This procedure tends to favour purity over completeness,
which is reasonable given the volume of alerts that will be
produced by LSST. To proceed we randomly sampled 2
million alerts from the full training sample (Sect. 2), which
were further equally divided in training and validation samples. We queried 6 alerts at a time for 3500 loops (further
queries resulted in overfitting, leading to performance decrease) for a final training sample composed of 21100 alerts.
We set the maximum depth of trees and minimum number
of alerts per leaf are set to be 15 and 0.01 % of the training
size, respectively. The model achieved 90.8 % purity and
52.4 % completeness in the validation sample.
6. Performance of classifiers
In this section we evaluate the different classifiers available
in Fink using the test sample composed of all alerts from
objects not in the training set of ELAsTiCCv1. In Sect. 7
we show how combining different classifiers can boost classification results.
Figure 8 shows the confusion matrix for each classifier;
each cell in the confusion matrix displays the results normalised by the predictions on top (bold), and by the true
values at the bottom (italics). Besides these overall metrics,
we analyse in Fig. 9 how metrics change with the number
of detections and the true host redshift (ZHELIO from the
truth table). This allows us to assess the ability of classifiers to generate unbiased samples, and their capabilities
15
16
https://ztf.snad.space/dr17/view/821207100004043
https://github.com/light-curve/light-curve-python
Article number,page 9 of 19
=== PAGE 10 ===
A&A proofs: manuscript no. main
When looking at the metrics as a function of redshift,
the precision for SN-like alerts drop as the simulated redshift increases: this is due to SLSN alerts being classified as
SN-like. The opposite is seen for the Long class, where low
redshift alerts are classified as SN-like. Recall, on the other
hand, remains almost constant for the full redshift range.
6.2. SuperNNova as a broad classifier
as a tool to select follow-up sources close to the time of
detection.
Machine Learning metrics such as ROC and precisionrecall curve can be found in Appendix A.
We show the performance metrics and confusion matrix in
Fig. 8b for SNN broad classifier. As found when validating the model, both the SN and Long classes have large
classification confusion. In Fig. 9b we see this confusion is
reduced with more detections as the classifier disentangles
Long and SNe light curves with more precision.
As with the CATS classifier, the Fast class is where the
results differ the most between the training and test metrics
with a similar trend of confusion between Fast and Periodic
light curves.
We highlight, that the loss used to train SuperNNova
is optimised for classification with large and representative training sets. In Möller & de Boissière (2019), we have
shown that ≈ 105 light curves per class for training are
necessary to achieve its top performance. To improve performance with ELAsTiCC, the loss could be modified to
allow the usage of non-balanced training sets and/or larger
training sets could be constructed with additional simulations or augmentation techniques. We leave this task for
future work.
6.1. CATS broad classification
6.3. SuperNNova binary classifiers
Figure 8a shows the metrics for the CATS broad classifier.
Similar to the cross-validation results presented in Sect. 5.1,
the model performs excellently with the SN-like, Periodic
and Non-Periodic classes, having AUCs above 0.95 for all
of them. However, again similar to the earlier results, it had
some issues with the Long and Short classes: more than half
of the Long alerts were classified as SN-like, and about 30%
of the Fast alerts were classified as Periodic, lowering the
recall for both classes when compared to the other three.
However, the purity for the Fast class is still above 90%,
while for the Long class the value is 83%, significantly lower
than for all others.
In Fig. 9a, it can be seen that CATS is able to correctly
classify samples with less than ten detections, obtaining a
precision of over 80% for every class except Long, and nearly
100% for SN-like, Periodic, and Non-periodic events. CATS
is able to successfully classify these objects very early, an
important quality when considering the schedule of followup observations. Also, Precision remains nearly constant as
the number of detections grow for all classes (except for the
Long class), showing the robustness of the model.
Precision for the Long alerts increase as the number of
detections grow since the model starts to better distinguish
SN-like from SLSN alerts as the features from longer light
curves begin to show. As expected from the results in Fig.
8a, recall for both the Fast and Long classes increase as
the number of detections grow, while SN-like and Periodic
alerts have near-constant recall for all light curve lengths.
Interestingly, very short Non-periodic light curves are classified as SN-like by the model, producing a low recall for
Non-periodic alerts with less than five detections.
We find better performance for the SN-like classification
with the binary classifier (Fig. 8c) than with the broad one
in particular for recall. This suggests, as expected, that the
increase of the training set for the target is extremely important for our algorithm. We also find an improvement
for classes with smaller training sets such as the Long class
(Fig. 8e), although the model still has troubles with this
class. The Fast class remains the hardest to classify with
this algorithm (see Fig. 8d).
The evolution of metrics as a function of number of detections and redshift for the SNN binary and broad classifiers is shown in Figs. 9c and 9b. The same trend is found
for both the broad and binary classifiers, where the precision for the Non-periodic and Long classes increase as
more detections are available. Periodic and SN-like classification show high performance with low number of detections. Thus, we expected a good performance in the classification of early light curves for these classes. This is an
important feature when scheduling follow-up observations,
as explored for Rubin SNe Ia in Möller et al. (2024).
We highlight that the binary classifiers presented in this
work were all trained in a similar manner without tuning
SNN to the different targets. Depending on the science goal,
data curation, loss and algorithm hyper-parameters could
be adjusted to improve its performance. For example, to
improve Fast transients classification we could train with
shorter light curves for all classes, an augmented training
set or a modified loss to tackle small training sets. As shown
in Möller et al. (2022) for SNe Ia, an adequate light curve
time span selection for a given goal to reduce non-transient
detections improves performance.
Fig. 7: Example of a rainbow fit on an SLSN light curve
(diaSourceId = 35707054076) using Eq. 4 for the bolometric component and Eq. 3 for the temperature component.
The flux is normalised to have a maximum at one.
Article number,page 10 of 19
=== PAGE 11 ===
B.M.O. Fraga et al.: Transient classifiers for Fink
6.4. Early supernova Ia
The performance of the EarlySNIa classifier is reported in
Fig. 8i. One caveat we should keep in mind is that the
module is only interested in classifying rising light curves.
Thus, several alerts are eliminated by selection cuts, never
being classified at all. Results presented here correspond to
alerts that survived the feature selection (Sect. 5.3). Among
these, the module was able to achieve ∼ 0.7 precision and
recall. Meaning the precision was maintained while recall
increased slightly when compared to results from the validation sample. This matches the results found during training and represents ≈ 10% decrease in comparison to those
reported in Leoni et al. (2022), which reports results from
the current EarlySN Ia module within Fink, applied to
the ZTF stream. Considering the significant increase in volume and complexity present in the ELAsTiCC data set, we
consider this a resilient and promising result. Once LSST
start running, an active learning procedure similar to the
one described in Leoni et al. (2022) can be employed in
real time, thus improving results found in this work. The
most common contaminants are: SN II (∼ 18%) and SNIbc
(∼ 9%). All other classes correspond to the remaining 3%,
with SNIa-91bg and SNIax comprising ∼ 1% each.
Figure 9e shows how classification results evolve with
the number of detections and simulated redshift. We note
that precision already starts higher than 0.6 for seven observed data points (the minimum requirement) and peaks
around 20 photometric points, while recall remains almost
stable even with more detections. The sample identified as
EarlySNIa by the algorithm is highly skewed towards small
light curves, with ∼ 75% of them having ten detections or
less. Moreover, since we are working only with rising behaviours, it is reasonable to expect that light curves with
lower number of points will dominate the results17 . In this
figure, we can also observe that classification results peak
for redshift around 0.5 and degrades after that. This is expected since the SN is most likely to be discovered at or
after maximum when at high redshifts.
6.5. Superluminous supernovae
Figure 8h displays the confusion matrix of the binary SLSN
classifier. It provides an excellent purity of 90.0 % and a recall of 45.8 %. In the context of the very large ELAsTiCC
data set, we favour this high precision low recall asymmetry
as it would still result in almost 200K SLSN alerts being
classified with high confidence. However, as illustrated by
Fig. 9d, the recall is highly dependent on the number of
detections of the light curves. While most SLSN are missed
when only a few data points are available, the recall increases to ∼50% when 20 observations are available and up
to ∼80% for 100 detections. Purity-wise, the performance of
the model linearly increases with the number of detections,
ranging from ∼60% to almost 100%. We observe that the
classifier presents a clear under performance in precision
for objects with redshift lower than 0.5. Indeed, SLSN are
intrinsically bright objects that are more frequently found
at high redshift (corresponding large observation volumes).
Therefore, a large majority of the sample has a redshift
17
The long duration alerts are attributed to long history of
forced photometry or variable sources with a significant burst
in the last months of the survey. This also correlates with the
steep decline in precision.
above 0.5 (with a maximum around z=1). It results in a
challenging learning task at low redshift, which impacts the
final performances. Outside this range, the classifier is conservative and therefore very reliable on positive answers.
Although the purity of the classifier is very high, a study
of the contamination reveals that almost two thirds of the
alerts wrongly classified as SLSN are SNII. This result can
be explained by the presence of SNIIn within the ELAsTiCC data set. This subtype of SNII, resulting from the
interaction of the SNII with the circumstellar medium, is
particularly bright and long-lasting. The most extreme ones
even stand at the border between the SNII and the SLSN
class, potentially forming a continuum between the two
classes Moriya et al. (2018). Hence, the classifier contamination is to be expected and is particularly hard to reduce.
Finally, a feature importance study has been conducted
in order to characterize the decision process. The most important column for classification is the error on the fit, highlighting that the parametric model chosen is suited to describe SLSN events. The second and third most important
features are parameters from the model, respectively the
amplitude (A) and the minimum temperature (Tmin ). It
once again demonstrates that the fit is key in the separation
of the parameter space. The high relevance of the temperature parameter in particular indicates that the Rainbow
framework enables the computation of informative features
to distinguish transient events.
7. Combining classifiers
Given the wealth of developed classifiers targeting different
science cases, combining some of them could provide better results. In this session we investigate the effectiveness
of considering ensembles of two classifiers built from intrinsically different algorithms in order to boost classification
results.
7.1. Broad classifier as a first step
We investigate the possibility of building a hierarchical classifier, where a broad classifier is initially applied to remove
a large part of the contaminants, passing its results to a binary, more specific, model, possibly resulting in a more pure
sample. We explore here using CATS before the SLSN classifier. Since the EarlySNIa binary classifier has the majority
of contaminants within the SN-like broad class, a previous
broad classifier is not expect to impact their results.
We take only the alerts that CATS classified as Long to
assess the performance of the SLSN classifier. Results are
shown in Fig. 10, where we can see improvement in both,
precision (from 0.9 to 0.953) and recall (0.458 to 0.682),
together with both AUCs (from 0.887/0.687 to 0.907/0.955
values for ROC/PR). Albeit small, this improvement could
help produce more reliable follow-up catalogues with very
few contaminants. The fraction of false negatives increased,
simply due to the sample to be classified by the SLSN binary classifier being smaller.
The total completeness from this sample is approximately 35%, a small decrease when compared to the binary
classifier alone. The fraction of correctly identified PISNe
drops by approximately the same amount; a still significant amount of PISNe were identified by this hierarchical
Article number,page 11 of 19
=== PAGE 12 ===
0.006
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
0.000
0.005 0.000 0.003 0.000 0.990
0.042
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.958
e
SN-lik
Fast
Long
dic
Perio
iodic
n-per
Predicted Class
0.2
0.0
No
0.018
0.215
0.008
0.756
0.001
0.021
0.000 0.823 0.000 0.999 0.000
0.000
0.054
0.000
0.946
0.000
0.002 0.047 0.004 0.001 0.848
0.013
0.014
0.009
0.002
e
SN-lik
Fast
Long
dic
Perio
Predicted Class
(a) CATS
0.000
0.961
riodic
0.996
0.008
0.001
0.999
r
Fast
0.4
Predicted Class
0.2
0.147
0.004
0.118
0.157
0.843
r
Long
Othe
Predicted Class
0.990
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
r
eriod
Non-P
ic
0.012
0.994
0.006
0.002
0.988
0.004
0.996
r
d
Perio
0.001
0.010
0.900
0.542
0.458
ic
Predicted Class
0.2
0.0
0.845
0.293
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.848
0.152
0.155
0.707
0.297
0.703
0.6
0.4
a
SLS
(g) SuperNNova binary for Non-periodic
0.4
Oth
0.999
0.0
Predicted Class
0.6
1.0
0.8
N
Othe
0.2
0.0
(f) SuperNNova binary for Periodic
Oth
0.995
True Class
0.005
0.4
Predicted Class
0.2
0.8
Othe
0.100
er
er
Oth
0.716
-Per
io
0.000
e
SN-lik
1.0
0.8
0.6
r
Othe
0.998
(e) SuperNNova binary for Long
0.284
0.031
0.948
Oth
0.853
1.0
0.969
0.052
0.4
1.0
0.8
er
0.0
(d) SuperNNova binary for Fast
1.000
0.986
dic
0.000
0.6
0.067
0.6
(c) SuperNNova binary for SN-like
Oth
0.334
True Class
0.666
0.018
0.0
0.882
Lon
g
Oth
er
0.8
Othe
dic
0.2
0.982
1.0
0.992
Fast
True Class
0.4
(b) SuperNNova broad
1.000
True Class
0.6
e
Non-p
1.0
Non
Oth
er
like
0.4
0.000
True Class
0.004
0.981
0.8
er
0.457
0.001
0.012 0.008 0.102 0.000 0.006
0.8
True Class
0.002
0.021
Peri
o
0.531
0.000 0.046 0.000 0.997 0.000
0.6
0.000
like
0.000
0.260
0.014
SN-
0.293
0.000
1.0
0.933
er
0.009
0.719
0.000 0.122 0.000 0.000 0.000
1.0
True Class
0.697
0.8
0.986 0.000 0.894 0.000 0.146
r
Othe
Predicted Class
(h) SLSN
SLSN
0.2
0.0
SNI
0.001
0.020 0.023 0.826 0.000 0.002
SN-
0.001
Fast
0.000
Lon
g
0.004
True Class
0.000
iodi Periodi
c
c
0.995
0.000 0.931 0.002 0.002 0.000
1.0
-per
0.974 0.000 0.169 0.000 0.008
Non
Lon
g
Non
-per
iodi Periodi
c
c
True Class
Fast
SN-
like
A&A proofs: manuscript no. main
r
Othe
Predicted Class
SNIa
0.2
0.0
(i) Early SNIa
Fig. 8: Confusion matrices for each classifier in the test test. For each cell in the confusion matrix, the top row (in bold)
was normalised to the predictions and the bottom row (in italics) to the true values so that the main diagonal shows the
precision in bold, on top, and recall in italics, at the bottom.
method, an important result considering the rarity of the
class.
This comes mainly from missing SLSNe, while the fraction of misclassified PISNe lowers by approximately 10%;
an important result since PISNe are one of the least represented objects in the test set.
7.2. SuperNNova binary into a broad classifier
Given that SNN has one binary classifier for each broad
class, we can combine them to create a multi-class classifier, potentially outperforming the broad SuperNNova
model. In order to obtain ROC and precision-recall curves,
we join together all probabilities for all five binary broad
classifiers and apply a softmax function to the probability
Article number,page 12 of 19
vector, similar to what a standard DL multi-class classifier does. The predicted class is considered to be the one
with highest probability. We note that there are a few light
curves (approximately 0.09%) that have all binary probabilities less than 0.5; that is, the models did not classify
it as being in any of the broad classes. These alerts are
mainly from the SN-like class, with SNII as the majority.
We nevertheless assigned the broad class with the highest
probability to them since it will not impact the results.
Results are presented in Fig. 11 where we see improvements over the broad SuperNNova classifier mainly for the
SN-like and Long classes, while for the Periodic and Nonperiodic the results are similar. The Fast class is the exception, where the combined binary results are worse than
the broad SNN and the binary SNN; the reason is that for
=== PAGE 13 ===
1.0
1.0
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.2
SN-like
Fast
Long
Periodic
Non-periodic
0.0
1
10
Number of detections
0.4
0.2
SN-like
Fast
Long
Periodic
Non-periodic
0.0
100
1
10
Number of detections
SN-like
Long
Non-periodic
0.4
Recall
1.0
Precision
1.0
Recall
Precision
B.M.O. Fraga et al.: Transient classifiers for Fink
SN-like
Long
Non-periodic
0.4
0.2
0.0
100
0.6
0.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Simulated redshift
2.5
3.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Simulated redshift
2.5
3.0
1.0
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.4
SN-like
Fast
Long
Periodic
Non-periodic
0.2
0.4
0.2
0.0
10
100
1
Number of detections
0.4
0.2
SN-like
Fast
Long
Periodic
Non-periodic
0.0
1
SN-like
Long
Non-periodic
Recall
1.0
Precision
1.0
Recall
Precision
(a) CATS
1.0
100
0.4
SN-like
Long
Non-periodic
0.2
0.0
10
0.0
0.0
Number of detections
0.6
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Simulated redshift
2.5
3.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Simulated redshift
2.5
3.0
1.0
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.6
0.6
SN-like
Fast
Long
Periodic
Non-periodic
0.4
0.2
0.4
0.2
0.0
10
Number of detections
100
1
10
Number of detections
0.4
0.2
SN-like
Fast
Long
Periodic
Non-periodic
0.0
1
SN-like
Long
Non-periodic
Recall
1.0
Precision
1.0
Recall
Precision
(b) SuperNNova broad
1.0
SN-like
Long
Non-periodic
0.4
0.2
0.0
100
0.6
0.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Simulated redshift
2.5
3.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Simulated redshift
2.5
3.0
(c) SuperNNova binary classifiers
Fig. 9: Evolution of precision and recall as a function of the number of detections (left two panels) and host galaxy
redshift (right two panels). Fast and periodic alerts have no redshift available and thus have only the first two panels.
a lot of Fast alerts, the binary classifiers for Periodic and
Non-periodic give larger probabilities than the Fast one. So
although in a Fast versus others scenario they would be correctly classified, when combining all binary classifiers they
end up being classified as either Periodic or Non-periodic,
making the results worse. Since SuperNNova requires balanced samples for training, the limitation on the number
of alerts is applied on each class separately, instead of all
classes being limited by the least represented. The model
now is presented with more variety during training, and the
probability of the correct class are improved.
7.3. Combining classifiers for purity
Given the large volume of data LSST is expected to deliver on a daily basis, being able to build extremely pure
samples out of tens of millions of light curves is extremely
important, especially for follow-up purposes. Some of the
models presented in Sect. 5 target the same class (or broad
class); therefore, one way to improve the purity is to combine classifiers by only considering alerts that have been
assigned the same class when presented to intrinsically different classifiers.
We analyse how our broad classification may be improved using CATS and the SuperNNova binary classifiers: we only consider alerts for which the probability of
the binary SNN classifier corresponding to the class pre-
dicted by CATS is larger than 0.5. This happens for approximately 96% of the alerts in the test set. We show the
confusion matrix over this sample in Fig. 12, where it can be
seen that the precision improved for all classes when compared to CATS and all SuperNNova classifiers. The recall
is lower compared to SNN for the long and fast classes (due
to CATS).
8. Discussion
Our results show that all classifiers have mostly satisfactory performance for their classes of interest, with very few
exceptions. Despite the difference in models and training
methods in the classifiers, a few common trends emerged.
All broad classifiers have trouble identifying the fast and
long classes, for both the validation and test sets. CATS
and SuperNNova (both the broad and the combined binary classifiers) have different issues, with the former having higher purity and the latter higher completeness. Furthermore, looking at Figs. 8a, 8b, and 11, both CATS and
SuperNNova mix up the same classes: Long with SN-like,
Fast with Periodic. This suggests that the similarity of the
classes is intrinsic to the data set.
The Periodic broad class is very well characterised in
the data, with all multi-class classifiers achieving almost
perfect purity and completeness. Indeed, the light curves
Article number,page 13 of 19
=== PAGE 14 ===
1.0
1.0
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.4
0.2
0.0
10
Number of detections
100
0.4
0.2
0.0
1
Recall
1.0
Precision
1.0
Recall
Precision
A&A proofs: manuscript no. main
0.2
0.0
1
10
Number of detections
100
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Simulated redshift
2.5
3.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0.8
1.0
Simulated redshift
2.5
3.0
1.0
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.4
0.2
0.0
10
Number of detections
100
0.4
0.2
0.0
1
Recall
1.0
Precision
1.0
Recall
Precision
(d) SLSN classifier
1.0
0.2
0.0
1
10
Number of detections
100
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Simulated redshift
2.5
3.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Simulated redshift
1.2
1.4
(e) EarlySNIa
Fig. 9: Continued.
0.047
SN-
0.542
like
1.0
0.953
0.4
0.318
0.682
r
Othe
Predicted Class
SLSN
0.2
Lon
g
Non
SLS
N
0.458
0.6
-per
iodi Periodi
c
c
0.082
True Class
True Class
0.918
Fast
Oth
er
0.8
0.0
0.990 0.000 0.742 0.000 0.107
0.896
0.000
0.088
0.000
0.016
0.000 0.023 0.000 0.005 0.008
0.000
0.148
0.000
0.595
0.256
0.010 0.003 0.251 0.000 0.004
0.224
0.002
0.752
0.006
0.015
0.000 0.961 0.000 0.994 0.073
0.000
0.050
0.000
0.931
0.020
0.001 0.013 0.008 0.000 0.809
0.005
0.003
e
SN-lik
Fast
0.007
0.000
0.985
Long
dic
Perio
erio
Non-p
Predicted Class
dic
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Fig. 10: Performance metrics for the SLSN classifier applied
to the sample of alerts classified as ‘long’ by CATS.
Fig. 11: Performance metrics for the combined SuperNNova binary classifiers.
for variable stars show a very distinctive periodicity, making
them easy to identify among the other classes.
SuperNNova binary classifiers have better recall than
the broad classifier for most classes, and an overall improvement particularly for the Long and SN-like classes. Given
the current configuration of SNN, binary classifiers leverage
better small training sets. Additionally, binary classifiers
can be tuned to the target goal and improve performance
with simple actions such as light curve length selection and
hyper-parameter variation.
SuperNNova binary classifiers can be combined into
one multi-class model, with better (or similar, depending
on the class) performance than its broad classifier. SNN is
lightweight, and thus it is feasible to do this without impacting LSST processing. A similar approach could be used
by other broad classifiers, although care must be taken that
the model is lightweight enough so that the extra compu-
CATS can be used as a first step in a hierarchical classification scheme, in which it sends to binary classifiers only
the alerts belonging to their respective broad class. When
applied to the SLSN classifier, it shows a small increase
in purity, even though both classifiers were not meant to
work together in the first place. The in-sample completeness shows significant increase when compared to SLSN by
itself.
The false positives of the EarlySNIa classifier are all
within the SN-like broad class. This in turn means that
using a broad classifier as a first step will not help improve
its results.
Article number,page 14 of 19
=== PAGE 15 ===
B.M.O. Fraga et al.: Transient classifiers for Fink
tational cost does not affect the time necessary to process
the alerts.
Samples with close to perfect purity can be built by
requiring two or more classifiers to match their predictions. Combining CATS and all SuperNNova binaries
gives slightly better purity for all classes when compared
to each individual model, with all classes except the Long
reaching close to 100% purity.
9. Conclusions
Lon
g
Non
-per
iodi
c
Peri
odic
True Class
Fast
SN-
like
For a few years now, broker teams have been successfully
working with the ZTF alert stream and communication protocols as a test bench for what is to be expected for LSST.
This experience has been extremely successful and has allowed for the development of an entire broker ecosystem,
along with a diverse and interdisciplinary community who
supports it. Nevertheless, as valuable as this experience has
been, it is also crucial to prepare the infrastructure for the
important and challenging differences between the data delivered by the two experiments.
ELAsTiCC is a kind reminder that beyond hardware
and data format, ML models and broker infrastructure
will need to change significantly in order to fulfill expectations that will rise with the arrival of LSST. This includes
the design of algorithms themselves, protocols for massive
data transfers between geographically disconnected science
teams, and experiment design for proper evaluation and
optimisation of trained models to allow for the processing
of millions of alerts per night. The analysis presented here
describes the strategies developed by the Fink team to address these issues.
We introduced CATS, a deep learning classifier built
especially to work with LSST data for broad classification, and it has shown great performance. Other classifiers, including SuperNNova and tree-based models, were
1.0
0.988 0.000 0.145 0.000 0.006
0.996
0.000
0.003
0.000
0.001
0.8
0.000 0.931 0.002 0.002 0.000
0.000
0.703
0.007
0.289
0.000
0.6
0.012 0.023 0.853 0.000 0.002
0.380
0.003
0.605
0.005
0.007
0.4
0.000 0.046 0.000 0.997 0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
0.000
0.2
0.001 0.000 0.001 0.000 0.993
0.004
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.996
e
SN-lik
Fast
Long
dic
Perio
eriod
Non-p
Predicted Class
ic
0.0
Fig. 12: Confusion matrix for the alerts where CATS and
each SuperNNova binary classifier agree (see text for details).
adapted from their current use on ZTF data. The adapted
models performed well in their respective classification
tasks, delivering pure and/or complete sub-samples. Moreover, we have also shown examples of how different algorithms can be used to build an ensemble classifier whose
results outperform those from individual algorithms.
Nevertheless, it is important to keep in mind that Fink
operates in a framework where each classifier (science module) is developed independently by different science teams.
Processing is centralised by the Fink infrastructure, but
model development is geographically and scientifically distributed. This means that each team has a different scientific goal in mind when developing their own classifier.
Given nine different classifiers (plus the combined ones)
working at different tasks and showing different strong
points, it is paramount to clarify the requirements for each
science case so that the user can make an informed decision when applying the models presented here. CATS, for
example, can produce pure samples for every class, but SuperNNova (both multi-class and binary classifiers) have a
better completeness for the fast and long classes and a similar purity for the SN-like and periodic classes. In the future,
it will be important to tailor models and/or combine different ones to achieve the top performance for a given science
goal.
We also call attention to details that should be kept
in mind when interpreting the classification results stated
here. First, we are bound by the diversity and complexity
of the initial data set. The real data will certainly contain a number of intermediate objects whose properties lie
in between classes, thus affecting these results. Moreover,
the choice of training sample is of utmost importance in
ML problems regarding both their sample sizes and representativeness. Compared to its predecessor, PLAsTiCC,
the objective of ELAsTiCC was the classification of alerts
(i.e. partial views of complete light curves). Faced with the
two different possibilities for a training set, we chose the
streamed alerts since they most resemble the test set and
results are more easily transferable to what is expected from
LSST.
Moreover, it is crucial to recognise that training an ML
model implies access to the data and to the necessary hardware to process it. During this challenge, a new service was
designed by Fink so that each team could access the curated data necessary for the training. This service was able
to serve millions of alerts regularly to various teams, where
the training of the models was largely performed on commodity hardware. Despite the undoubted usefulness of the
data transfer service, irrespective of the volume of data to
be transferred, we note that at the LSST scale, training
models will require user teams to access dedicated hardware accelerators hosted on large data centres. This is an
area where Fink is actively planning on providing and thus
enabling a service for the community to train models at
scale.
Considering the practical observational application of
the classification results, early identification is paramount
for the optimisation of follow-up resources and a major task
of alert brokers. We have shown that most of our ML algorithms are capable of obtaining high-precision classification
with less than 20 points. As more observations are added,
the models generally give more accurate results. For the
SN-like and fast classes, this performance increase is only
valid with detection time spans related to their variability.
Article number,page 15 of 19
=== PAGE 16 ===
A&A proofs: manuscript no. main
Finally, keeping in mind the intrinsic differences between simulated and real data, results presented here can
be used to calibrate expectations regarding the output of
Fink science modules in the first stages of LSST operations.
Throughout the ten years of the survey, classifications will
certainly evolve and present even better numerical results.
In summary, we have shown that Fink is able to process ELAsTiCC alerts in a fast and efficient manner and
provide informative ML classification scores for a variety
of science cases. This proves the adequateness of the Fink
infrastructure and ML algorithms to process the big data
volumes of Rubin LSST and, consequently, to contribute to
the realisation of its scientific potential.
Acknowledgements. We thank Robert Knop, Gautham Narayan,
Rick Kessler and all others involved in the development of ELAsTiCC for enabling this work. We thank Konstantin Malanchev for
adapting the light_curve feature extraction package (Malanchev
et al. 2021, https://github.com/light-curve/light-curve-python)
for use within the EarlySNIa and SLSN classifier. This work was
developed within the Fink community and made use of the Fink
community broker resources. Fink is supported by LSST-France and
CNRS/IN2P3. This is a result from the 2022 Fink Hackathon, 19 26 November 2022, Grimentz, Swizertland. This work received funding from CNRS MITI Evènements Rares - 2022, under project number 226696, Finding the first generation of stars with LSST (Fink).
AM is supported by the ARC Discovery Early Career Researcher
Award (DECRA) project number DE230100055. Part of this work
was supported by the ARC Centres of Excellence OzGrav and OzGrav 2 project numbers CE170100004 and CE230100016. This work
was supported by the ‘Programme National de Physique Stellaire’
(PNPS) of CNRS/INSU cofunded by CEA and CNES. CRB acknowledges the financial support from CNPq (316072/2021-4) and from
FAPERJ (grants 201.456/2022 and 210.330/2022) and the FINEP
contract 01.22.0505.00 (ref. 1891/22). BMOF, CRB and AS acknowledge the LITCOMP/COTEC/CBPF multi-GPU development team
for all the support in the artificial intelligence infrastructure and SciMind’s High-Performance multi-GPU system.
References
Abadi, M., Agarwal, A., Barham, P., et al. 2015, TensorFlow: LargeScale Machine Learning on Heterogeneous Systems, software available from tensorflow.org
Aivazyan, V., Almualla, M., Antier, S., et al. 2022, MNRAS, 515, 6007
Aleo, P. D., Malanchev, K., Sharief, S., et al. 2023, ApJS, 266, 9
Allam, Tarek, J., Peloton, J., & McEwen, J. D. 2023, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2303.08951
Alves, C. S., Peiris, H. V., Lochner, M., et al. 2022, ApJS, 258, 23
Bamford, S. P., Nichol, R. C., Baldry, I. K., et al. 2009, MNRAS, 393,
1324
Baron, D. 2019, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1904.07248
Bellm, E. C., Kulkarni, S. R., Graham, M. J., et al. 2019, PASP, 131,
018002
Bengio, Y., Simard, P., & Frasconi, P. 1994, IEEE Transactions on
Neural Networks, 5, 157
Biswas, B., Ishida, E. E. O., Peloton, J., et al. 2023a, A&A, 677, A77
Biswas, B., Lao, J., Aubourg, E., et al. 2023b, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2311.04845
Bom, C. R., Fraga, B. M. O., Dias, L. O., et al. 2022, MNRAS, 515,
5121
Boone, K. 2019, AJ, 158, 257
Cabrera-Vives, G., Moreno-Cartagena, D., Astorga, N., et al. 2024,
A&A, 689, A289
Carry, B., Peloton, J., Le Montagner, R., Mahlke, M., & Berthier, J.
2024, A&A, 687, A38
Dark Energy Survey Collaboration, Abbott, T., Abdalla, F. B., et al.
2016, MNRAS, 460, 1270
DES Collaboration, Abbott, T. M. C., Acevedo, M., et al. 2024, ApJ,
973, L14
Dozat, T. 2016, in Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on
Learning Representations, 1–4
Eriksen, M., Alarcon, A., Cabayol, L., et al. 2020, MNRAS, 497, 4565
Förster, F., Cabrera-Vives, G., Castillo-Navarrete, E., et al. 2021, AJ,
161, 242
Article number,page 16 of 19
Hilbe, J. M., Riggs, J., Wandelt, B. D., et al. 2014, Significance, 11,
48
Hložek, R., Malz, A. I., Ponder, K. A., et al. 2023, ApJS, 267, 25
Ho, T. K. 1995, in Proceedings of 3rd international conference on
document analysis and recognition, Vol. 1, IEEE, 278–282
Hochreiter, S. & Schmidhuber, J. 1997, Neural Computation, 9, 1735
Ishida, E. E. O. 2019, Nature Astronomy, 3, 680
Ivezić, Ž., Kahn, S. M., Tyson, J. A., et al. 2019, ApJ, 873, 111
Karim, F., Majumdar, S., Darabi, H., & Harford, S. 2019, Neural
Networks, 116, 237
Karpov, S. & Peloton, J. 2022, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2202.05719
Karpov, S. & Peloton, J. 2023, Contributions of the Astronomical
Observatory Skalnate Pleso, 53, 69
Kessler, R., Bassett, B., Belov, P., et al. 2010, PASP, 122, 1415
Kessler, R., Bernstein, J. P., Cinabro, D., et al. 2009, PASP, 121, 1028
Khakpash, S., Bianco, F. B., Modjaz, M., et al. 2024, arXiv e-prints,
submitted to ApJS, arXiv:2405.01672
Knop, R. & ELAsTiCC Team. 2023, in American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts, Vol. 55, American Astronomical Society
Meeting Abstracts, 117.02
Kuhn, M. A., Benjamin, R. A., Ishida, E. E. O., et al. 2023, Research
Notes of the American Astronomical Society, 7, 57
Le Montagner, R., Peloton, J., Carry, B., et al. 2023, A&A, 680, A17
Leoni, M., Ishida, E. E. O., Peloton, J., & Möller, A. 2022, A&A, 663,
A13
LSST Science Collaboration, Abell, P. A., Allison, J., et al. 2009,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:0912.0201
Malanchev, K. L., Pruzhinskaya, M. V., Korolev, V. S., et al. 2021,
MNRAS, 502, 5147
Malz, A. I., Dai, M., Ponder, K. A., et al. 2023, arXiv e-prints, submitted to A&A, arXiv:2305.14421
Matheson, T., Stubens, C., Wolf, N., et al. 2021, AJ, 161, 107
Möller, A. & de Boissière, T. 2019, MNRAS, 491, 4277
Moller, A. & Main de Boissiere, T. 2022, in Machine Learning for
Astrophysics, 21
Möller, A., Peloton, J., Ishida, E. E. O., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 501,
3272
Möller, A., Smith, M., Sako, M., et al. 2022, MNRAS, 514, 5159
Möller, A., Wiseman, P., Smith, M., et al. 2024, MNRAS, 533, 2073
Moriya, T. J., Inserra, C., Tanaka, M., et al. 2022, Astronomy &
Astrophysics, 666, A157
Moriya, T. J., Sorokina, E. I., & Chevalier, R. A. 2018, Space Sci. Rev.,
214, 59
Nordin, J., Brinnel, V., van Santen, J., et al. 2019, A&A, 631, A147
Pan, S. J. & Yang, Q. 2010, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and
Data Engineering, 22, 1345
Patterson, M. T., Bellm, E. C., Rusholme, B., et al. 2018, Publications
of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 131, 018001
Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., et al. 2011, Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 12, 2825
Perlmutter, S., Aldering, G., Goldhaber, G., et al. 1999, ApJ, 517, 565
Pruzhinskaya, M., Volnova, A., Kornilov, M., et al. 2022, Research
Notes of the American Astronomical Society, 6, 122
Pruzhinskaya, M. V., Ishida, E. E. O., Novinskaya, A. K., et al. 2023,
A&A, 672, A111
Qu, H. & Sako, M. 2022, AJ, 163, 57
Riess, A. G., Filippenko, A. V., Challis, P., et al. 1998, AJ, 116, 1009
Rumelhart, D. E. & McClelland, J. L. 1987, Learning Internal Representations by Error Propagation, 318–362
Russeil, E., Ishida, E. E. O., Le Montagner, R., Peloton, J., & Moller,
A. 2022, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2211.10987
Russeil, E., Olivetti de França, F., Malanchev, K., et al. 2024, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2402.04298
Russeil, E., Malanchev, K. L., Aleo, P. D., et al. 2024, A&A, 683,
A251
Schmidt, R. M. 2019, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1912.05911
Smith, K. W., Williams, R. D., Young, D. R., et al. 2019, Research
Notes of the AAS, 3, 26
Vincenzi, M., Brout, D., Armstrong, P., et al. 2024, ApJ, 975, 86
Vincenzi, M., Sullivan, M., Möller, A., et al. 2023, MNRAS, 518, 1106
=== PAGE 17 ===
B.M.O. Fraga et al.: Transient classifiers for Fink
Appendix A: ROC and precision-recall curves
Article number,page 17 of 19
=== PAGE 18 ===
1.0
1.0
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.6
Precision
True Positive Rate
A&A proofs: manuscript no. main
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
SN-like AUC = 0.995
Fast AUC = 0.996
Long AUC = 0.944
Periodic AUC = 1.000
Non-periodic AUC = 1.000
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.4
SN-like AUC = 0.995
Fast AUC = 0.815
Long AUC = 0.632
Periodic AUC = 1.000
Non-periodic AUC = 0.998
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.2
False Positive Rate
Recall
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.6
Precision
True Positive Rate
(a) CATS
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
SN-like AUC = 0.990
Fast AUC = 0.828
Long AUC = 0.893
Periodic AUC = 0.992
Non-periodic AUC = 0.997
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.4
SN-like AUC = 0.990
Fast AUC = 0.329
Long AUC = 0.308
Periodic AUC = 0.994
Non-periodic AUC = 0.930
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.2
False Positive Rate
Recall
1.0
1.0
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.6
Precision
True Positive Rate
(b) SuperNNova broad
0.4
0.2
SN-like AUC = 0.995
Fast AUC = 0.930
Long AUC = 0.935
Periodic AUC = 0.997
Non-periodic AUC = 0.994
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
False Positive Rate
0.8
1.0
0.4
SN-like AUC = 0.995
Fast AUC = 0.032
Long AUC = 0.503
Periodic AUC = 0.979
Non-periodic AUC = 0.907
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
Recall
(c) SuperNNova binary classifiers
Fig. A.1: Receiver operating characteristic and precision-recall curves for all classifiers.
Article number,page 18 of 19
=== PAGE 19 ===
1.0
1.0
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.6
Precision
True Positive Rate
B.M.O. Fraga et al.: Transient classifiers for Fink
0.4
0.2
0.4
0.2
0.0
AUC=0.887
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
False Positive Rate
0.8
0.0
1.0
AUC=0.687
0.0
0.2
0.4
Recall
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.6
0.8
1.0
(d) SLSN
1.0
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.6
Precision
True Positive Rate
0.8
0.4
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.2
0.4
0.0
AUC=0.878
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
False Positive Rate
0.8
1.0
AUC=0.766
0.0
0.2
0.4
Recall
(e) Early SNIa
Fig. A.1: Continued.
Article number,page 19 of 19
=== PAGE 20 ===
