Draft version October 13, 2017
Preprint typeset using LATEX style AASTeX6 v. 1.0

THE SED MACHINE: A ROBOTIC SPECTROGRAPH FOR FAST TRANSIENT CLASSIFICATION

arXiv:1710.02917v2 [astro-ph.IM] 11 Oct 2017

Nadejda Blagorodnova 1 , James D. Neill 1 , Richard Walters 1,2 , Shrinivas R. Kulkarni 1 , Christoffer Fremling
1
, Sagi Ben-Ami 3 , Richard G. Dekany 1,2 , Jason R. Fucik 2 , Nick Konidaris 4 , Reston Nash 2 , Chow-Choong
Ngeow 5 , Eran O. Ofek 6 , Donal O’ Sullivan 1 , Robert Quimby 7,8 , Andreas Ritter 9 , Karl E. Vyhmeister 1,2
1

Cahill Center for Astrophysics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA

2

Caltech Optical Observatories, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA

3

Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, 60 Garden St., Cambridge, MA 02138, USA

4

Observatories of the Carnegie Institution for Science, 813 Santa Barbara St. Pasadena, CA 91101, USA

5

Graduate Institute of Astronomy, National Central University, Jhongli 32001, Taiwan

6

Department of Particle Physics and Astrophysics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel

7

Department of Astronomy / Mount Laguna Observatory, San Diego State University, 5500 Campanile Drive, San Diego, CA, 92812-1221

8

Kavli IPMU (WPI), UTIAS, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba 277-8583, Japan

9

Department of Astrophysical Sciences, Princeton University, 4 Ivy Lane, New Jersey 08544, USA

ABSTRACT
Current time domain facilities are finding several hundreds of transient astronomical events a year. The
discovery rate is expected to increase in the future as soon as new surveys such as the Zwicky Transient
Facility (ZTF) and the Large Synoptic Sky Survey (LSST) come on line. At the present time, the rate
at which transients are classified is approximately one order or magnitude lower than the discovery
rate, leading to an increasing “follow-up drought”. Existing telescopes with moderate aperture can
help address this deficit when equipped with spectrographs optimized for spectral classification. Here,
we provide an overview of the design, operations and first results of the Spectral Energy Distribution
Machine (SEDM), operating on the Palomar 60-inch telescope (P60). The instrument is optimized
for classification and high observing efficiency. It combines a low-resolution (R∼100) integral field
unit (IFU) spectrograph with “Rainbow Camera” (RC), a multi-band field acquisition camera which
also serves as multi-band (ugri) photometer. The SEDM was commissioned during the operation of
the intermediate Palomar Transient Factory (iPTF) and has already proved lived up to its promise.
The success of the SEDM demonstrates the value of spectrographs optimized to spectral classification.
Introduction of similar spectrographs on existing telescopes will help alleviate the follow-up drought
and thereby accelerate the rate of discoveries.
Keywords: Spectral energy distribution, spectroscopy, instrumentation
1. INTRODUCTION

It is now widely agreed that Time Domain Astronomy
(TDA) – the study of transients, variables and moving
objects – is one of the Frontier Fields of this decade
(NationalResearchCouncil 2010). The origin of modern
time domain astronomy can be traced to the program
begun by Walter Baade and Fritz Zwicky. The first outcome of this effort was the distinction between novae
and super-novae (Baade & Zwicky 1934). In this seminal paper not only the authors remarked on the brilliance of supernovae but also noted the possibility that
this phenomena marked the end of a star’s life. Two
years later Zwicky initiated a dedicated time domain
astronomy program with an 18-inch Schmidt telescope
survey sited at the Palomar Observatory. By the time of
Zwicky’s death (1974), the supernovae toll stood at 380

supernovae with 120 found by Zwicky working by himself. The importance of supernovae in building up of
the periodic table was a major observational-theoretical
achievement of this period (Burbidge et al. 1957). Coming closer to this era the brilliance of supernovae opened
up an entirely new tool for cosmography. Supernovae
of type Ia were found to be standardizable candles and
led to the first indication of an accelerated expansion of
the Universe (Riess et al. 1998; Perlmutter et al. 1999).
So monumental were these two achievements that they
were recognized by the Nobel Prize committee.
The rise of TDA is driven entirely by technological
progress in sensors and computing. There are more than
a dozen optical TDA surveys, e.g. Catalina Sky Survey
(Drake et al. 2009), PanSTARRS-1 (Kaiser et al. 2002),
the (intermediate) Palomar Transient Factory (iPTF;

2
Rau et al. 2009), ASASSN (Shappee et al. 2014) and
ATLAS (Tonry 2011). As a result of these surveys the
supernova discovery rate has increased dramatically and
the current annual rate of classified supernovae is over
a thousand 1 . The large sample size has resulted not
only in the discovery of new classes of supernovae (e.g.
super-luminous supernovae) but also new sub-classes of
extra-galactic explosions (e.g. intermediate luminosity
infrared transients, luminous red novae, calcium rich
supernovae). Separately, new types of eruptive variables (e.g. extreme variability in active galactic nuclei)
and cataclysmic explosions, e.g. tidal disruption events
(TDEs) are now routinely found. New upcoming surveys such as the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF; Bellm
2014), BlackGEM 2 and Large Synoptic Sky Survey
(LSST; Ivezić et al. 2008) will push these boundaries
even further, discovering up to hundreds of new supernovae every night.

10000

Reported transients
Confirmed SNe

N / year

1000
100
10
1
1920

1940

1960
1980
Year

2000

Figure 1.

Transient events reported per year (black) and
confirmed SNe (orange) per year between 1916 and 2017.
Source: http://www.rochesterastronomy.org. The discoveries may contain a fraction of galactic transients or extreme
variability in AGN.

In Figure 1 we display the classified supernova rate.
We expect the discovery rate of supernovae to continue
a dramatic growth, thanks to the on-going and planned
surveys. However, identifying supernovae candidates is
merely the first step. Only with the second step – spectral classification – is the discovery process completed.
However, spectroscopy requires follow-up observations
in most instances on telescopes with apertures larger
than that of the discovery telescope. The growing gap
between the rate at which transients are identified and

1 Source: http://www.rochesterastronomy.org
2 https://astro.ru.nl/blackgem/

classified is truly an “elephant in the room”.
Traditionally low resolution spectroscopy meant a
spectral resolution, R = λ/∆λ ≈ 1000. Fortunately,
spectral classification of supernovae and TDEs, with
their large expansion velocities, v/c ≈ 1/30 can be
done with lower spectral resolution.3 Next, robotic
spectroscopy would be very helpful given the increasing
discovery rate of transients. These two considerations
have led to “intermediate resolution” (R ≈ 400) spectrographs on robotic telescopes: the Folded Low Order
whYte-pupil Double-dispersed Spectrograph (FLOYDS;
Sand et al. 2011) and SPectrograph for Rapid Acquisition of Transients (SPRAT; Piascik et al. 2014) mounted
at the 2-m robotic Liverpool telescope in La Palma
(Spain).
The major challenge for robotic spectroscopy is in
placing the target precisely on the narrow (1–200 ) slit.
This usually results in an iterative target acquisition
approach, where the failure rate may increase due to
complex host galaxy environment or non-ideal observing
conditions. This problem can be solved by an integral
field unit (IFU) spectrograph with a reasonably large
field of view (FOV; say 1500 or larger). This approach,
apart from the ease of target acquisition, has the additional advantage of the study of the SN environment.
Thus, a major step forward in filling the gap of transient follow-up can be made by deploying a low resolution, robotically controlled IFU spectrograph with
R ≈ 100 and an FOV of, say, ≈ 3000 square on a dedicated one-meter class telescope with sufficient throughput to achieve a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 5 for a
20.5 r-band magnitude transient (the faint end of current TDA surveys) with an exposure time of 3600 s. The
idea of such instrument was conceived in year 2009 as a
resource for spectroscopic follow-up of transients discovered by PTF. Here, we present an overview of “Spectral
Energy Distribution Machine” (SEDM) optimized for
rapid classification spectroscopy. The SEDM is just such
an IFU spectrograph and has been in routine operation
at the Palomar 60-inch telescope (P60) since 27 April,
2016.
The paper is organized as following. Section 2 provides an overview of the instrument design and main
characteristics. Section 3 describes the daily operations
and data flow. The photometric and spectroscopic reduction pipelines are explained in Section 4. We provide
an overview of the performance and a summary of the
first scientific results of SEDM in Section 5. Finally,
Section 7 offers a discussion on the next steps for the
SEDM project and the implications for future transient

3 For a fixed telescope aperture the spectral classification rate
increases as R−1 .

3
searches in optical wavelengths.
2. INSTRUMENT OVERVIEW

The SEDM is, by default, the sole instrument for
robotic Palomar 60-inch telescope (P60). The telescope
optics are Ritchey-Chrétien, so that both primary and
secondary mirrors have hyperbolic reflecting surfaces.
This allows for a wider field of view within a compact
design: the tube of the telescope measures 150 inches
(3.8 m) long. An 18-inch (45.7 cm) central hole in the
primary mirror allows starlight to reach the Cassegrain
focus (f/8.75) with a 525-inch (13.3 m) focal length. The
telescope was roboticized in 2004 and single purposed
to for imaging photometry, in particular following GRB
afterglows (Cenko et al. 2006). In August 2016, the
GRB imaging photometer was removed and the SEDM
installed at the Cassegrain focus of P60.
The SEDM instrument is composed of two main channels: the Rainbow Camera (RC) and the Integral-Field
Unit (IFU), mounted in a T-shaped layout (see Figure
2). The optics and cameras are protected by an external
cover, designed as a sealed container to minimize dust
contamination. Overall, the instrument is of a compact
size, of 1.0×0.6 m. The total weight, including electronics, is of ∼140 kg.
The optical path of the instrument is designed so
that most of the light from the Cassegrain focus is directed towards the photometric instrument, the RC. The
light for the IFU is captured by a pickoff prism that is
mounted above the center of the four filter holders for
the RC, close to the telescope focal plane. The mirror directs the light through an expander lens to obtain
an appropriate scale for the lenslet array (LA). Then,
the light path is folded by a flat mirror, and directed
through a field-flattening lens onto the lenslet array. The
LA breaks up the field into an array of 2340 hexagonal
pupil images that are then sent through a six-element
collimator onto the dispersing triple prism. The triple
prism design ensures that the spectroscopic resolution,
defined as R = ∆λ/λ, is at a constant value of R ≈ 100.
The dispersed pupil images are then focused by a fiveelement camera through a CCD window that is multicoated for high transmission. Both the IFU and the RC
have relay optics that allow the images to come to focus
at their respective CCD detectors, as well as an additional focus mechanism to ensure that the RC and the
IFU channels are parfocal. The RC and the IFU are
focused by adjusting the position of the movable secondary mirror. The spectrograph is focused using the
movable camera optics.
The SEDM uses two identical Princeton Instruments
Pixis 2048B eXelon model 2048×2048 and 13.5µm pixels CCDs. For each, the CCD window is anti-reflection
coated to improve overall detector response. Thermo-

electric coolers keep the detectors at a temperature of
−55◦ C. The excess heat is removed via a glycol cooling
system attached to a chiller. A summary of the specifications for the detectors is shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Specifications for the SEDM detectors.
Detector feature

Description

Detector size

2048×2048 pixels

Read noise (slow)

5 e− /pix

Read noise (fast)

22 e− /pix

Read time (fast)

5s

Read time (slow)

40 s

Gain

1.8 e− /ADU

Pixel size

13.5 µm

Saturation

55000 ADU

Non-linearity

45000 ADU

Figure 2. Overview of SEDM instrument layout. The light

path from the Cassegrain focus is shown with a red arrow.
The light for the photometric instrument is collected by the
RC, located in the centre. The light for the IFU is initially
redirected towards the mirror shown in the left side of the
picture and reflected into the lenslet barrel. The light from
each lenslet is then dispersed by the triple prism system,
placed in the centre. In a final step, the IFU barrel aligns
the individual spectra on the detector.

2.1. Rainbow Camera
The RC is used for guiding, calibration, target acquisition and science imaging. The 13×13 arcmin FOV is
split into four quadrants, one for each filter: u0 , g 0 , r0
and i0 . Because part of the field is obscured by the filter

4
holder, only ∼ 6×6 arcmin field is available for imaging
the target with one filter. In order to obtain an exposure
with a different filter, the telescope is offset to center the
target in a new quadrant. A raw SEDM image is shown
in Figure 3, where the Crab Nebula can be seen in the
g 0 panel. The blue rectangle shows the position for the
IFU.
2000

g'

u'

RC specification

Descriptions

FOV

6.0×6.0 arcmin

Pixel scale

0.39400

0

355 nm

0

λeff (g )

477 nm

λeff (r0 )

623 nm

λeff (u )

0

λeff (i )

762 nm

1750

∆λ(u0 )

67 nm

∆λ(g 0 )

148 nm

1500

∆λ(r0 )

134 nm

Y [pixels]

0

1250
1000
750
500
250

r'
0

i'

0

500

1000
X [pixels]

1500

2000

Figure 3. Overview of an RC raw image, obtained at the

Palomar 60-inch telescope. The Crab Nebula can be seen in
the upper left corner, corresponding to the g-band. As it can
be appreciated in the image, the background level for each
filter is different, with the u-band being the least sensitive.
Light reaching at the center of the cross is directed towards
the IFU, the FOV of which FOV is shown as a blue rectangle.

100
u0

g0

r0

500

600
700
Wavelength [nm]

QE -55 C

i0

% Transmittance

80
60
40
20
0
300

400

800

900

1000

∆λ(i )

170 nm

IFU specification

Description

FOV

28×28 00

Pixel size

0.125 00

Lenslet array size (spaxels)

45 × 52

Single lenslet diameter

0.7500

Lenslet size

52×45

R

∼100

Dispersion

17.4−35 Å/pix

Table 2. Instrument specifications for the RC and IFU.

The RC uses Astrodon 4 generation 2 filters. Their
transmittance are shown in Figure 4, along with the
predicted quantum efficiency of the CCDs at the current operating temperature. The specifications for each
filter, pixel size and single filter FOV are shown in the
upper part of Table 2.
2.2. Integral Field Unit
The SEDM IFU is a lenslet array covering 28 ×
28 00 with 52×45 hexagonal lenslets that project their
beams through a triple prism that produces a constant
spectral resolution of R = ∆λ/λ ∼ 100. A pickoff prism
intercepts a field of size 28 × 28 00 from the center of the
f/8.75 P60 beam. The pickoff location minimizes the
field lost by the RC. The IFU beam relayed by the pickoff prism is magnified by a doublet expander lens and
field-flattened by a singlet lens onto the lenslet array via
a flat mirror that folds the light path. The lenslet array
divides the relayed beam into 2340 pupils of 0.75 00 in diameter, which are then collimated onto the triple prism.
The dispersed beams that emerge from the triple prism
are focused by the camera optics onto the CCD. As an
example, Figure 5 shows the IFU image of Saturn as
directly projected on the detector. A summary of the
specifications of the instrument are shown in lower panel
of Table 2.
3. OPERATIONS AND DATA FLOW

Figure 4.

Astrodon generation 2 filters transmittance used
for the RC. The CCD quantum efficiency at current operating temperature is shown with a dashed line.

4 http://www.astrodon.com

5

25
P60 S

arcsecons

20

Telescope
P60 Primary

IFU Cam

15
Instrument
RC Cam

10
Telescope
Control System

5

TCS
communication
server

0

Data
archive

Server
room

0

5

10

15
arcseconds

20

Instrument
control

SEDM robot

25

Figure 5. Raw negative IFU image of Saturn. The exposure

Caltech
information
system

SEDM user
interface

time is 1 s. The size of the IFU covers 28×28 00 .

Figure 6 provides a high level graphical summary of
the SEDM observing system.
3.1. SEDM Startup
What follows below is a description of the flow of
activities for a typical day. At 1600 Pacific time the
Palomar crew release P60 to the astronomical operations group. The master program then initializes the
main software module controlling the instrument (the
“SEDM robot”) and also creates a simulated schedule for the night. Diagnostic checks are undertaken to
ensure that the various sub-systems (telescope, dome,
IFU & RC, data processing computer and archival computer). Should a failure be detected then an automated
warning is issued. On-site personnel then (typically)
have about two hours to diagnose and fix the problem.
Once all diagnostic checks are successful the automation script begins a series of bias, arc-lamps, and dome
flats using the IFU camera. For the RC camera, in addition to the above, a set of twilight flats are undertaken
(provided the weather conditions permit opening of the
dome).
Just before nautical twilight, the system runs a focus
loop using the secondary stage on the Palomar 60-inch.
A bright star is selected from the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (SAO) star catalog according to
visibility and airmass constraints. The focus for the RC
is obtained from a set of short exposures on the target.
The last best focus position is used as an initial position,
and the stage of the secondary mirror moves 5 steps on
each side, with an increment of 0.25 mm. A two degree

SEDM scheduler

Operations
DB

Data
archive

Communication
Data flow
Instrument Control
Light path

Figure 6. Schematic representation of the SEDM hardware

and software modules. A web user interface allows to create
observation requests, which are scheduled for the night. The
robot uses the schedule to communicate with the telescope
and the instrument to carry out the exposures and send the
data from Palomar to the Caltech data archive. Each machine is shown as a green box.

polynomial is fit to the FWHM of the images to interpolate the new best focus position. An similar process
is followed for finding the focus of the IFU, but in this
case we fit the PSF of the image obtained by collapsing
3-D IFU cube along the wavelength axis.
At the beginning of nautical twilight, the robot takes
a standard star observation before acquiring the first
science target.
3.2. Acquisition process
The acquisition process for IFU science targets is
shown in Figure 7. For bright targets ( <16.5 mag) only
one exposure is undertaken (hereafter “A” exposure).
For stars fainter than this magnitude two exposures with
identical exposure time but with an angular offset are
undertaken (“A” and “B”). The paired images allow for
a simple and robust subtraction of the background. In
order to accurately compute the offset for the target, a
10–30 s acquisition exposure is undertaken with the RC.

6
The resultant image is then analyzed using a custom
astrometry fitting program to obtain the true pointing
of the telescope. Typically, this step takes 20–30 s depending on the field. The robot uses this information to
accurately offset the telescope, so that the target falls
close to center of the field of view of the IFU. In the case
of a combined A and B exposures, the system also analyzes the statistical properties of the background where
the B pair, relative to A, is going to be placed. The goal
is to choose the emptiest location for the pair, so that
with a simple subtraction operation will result in efficient removal of the sky. Following the last exposure is
complete, the robot requests the slew of the telescope to
the next field. During this period the CCD is read. This
way the on-sky efficiency is maximized. All acquisition
images are used to create finder charts for the objects.
These charts are helpful during the IFU data reduction.

morning nautical twilight. The telescope is then stowed
and a summary email of the night’s observations is sent
out.
Errors that occur during the night are handled and
logged by the automation script. In the event of an
unrecoverable error, the system is programmed to stow
the telescope, close the dome, and send out an email and
text alert indicating the problem.
3.3. SEDM Observatory Control System
The SEDM Observatory Control System (SOCS) is a
custom built python code designed to integrate hardware components, scheduling and processing software
into one program. The python module incorporates six
sub packages that provide access to various components.
By compartmentalizing these functions, the system can
be easily modified and expanded in the future. The functions carried out by the packages are described below.

RA, DEC

Slew to target

Take acquisition
image

Solve
Astrometry

Yes

A+B
exposure?

Create
finder chart

No

Compute statistics for
the A/B pair and A/B
offsets

Compute single
offset

Offset to position
A

Offset to IFU

Take exposure A

Take exposure

Offset to position
B

Take exposure B

Figure 7.

Acquisition process followed by the robot.
The steps performed by the telescope are encoded in yellow whereas the instrument actions are shown in blue. In
red, we show the steps executed by the software acquisition
modules.

Under normal circumstances, the system operates autonomously through the night. The astronomical observations end with flat-field exposures undertaken at

• Camera: This package handle communications
with the cameras. The RC and IFU cameras
are off-the-shelf Princeton Pixis cameras (E2V
2048×2048: CCD42-40). Communication with
these cameras are established via fiber to USB connection and a custom python package that allows
the setting of various camera parameters (exposure time, gain, readout speed amplifier, and shutter). The drivers for these cameras are currently
configured for Windows, so that they run in a separate machine. The SOCS script communicates
with this Windows machine via a TCP/IP socket
connection.
• Observatory: This package contains scripts to
handle all the physical components – telescope,
dome and arc lamps – of the observatory. Communications with the telescope and dome systems
occur via a TCP/IP socket connection to the Telescope Control System (TCS). The arc-lamps are
controlled via a network power switch.
• Sky: The sky package contains scripts for calculating the observing times for a night and a special
targets class. Observing times are calculated using the pyephem package. A custom python class
was written to create target objects. These objects
contain all the meta data for each requested science target observation. This information includes
the objects RA, DEC, observing constraints, and
history of the observations already taken. Targets
are complied from a SQL database which gets updated in real time as the observations take place.
• Scheduler: All targets are assigned a numerical
priority number typically ranging from 1-5. The

7
scheduling module then rearranges targets based
on input constraints for observing cadence, Moon
separation, Moon illumination, and airmass constraint. A printout of the observing plan for the
night is then made. For the rest of the night, any
new targets assigned in real time into the queue
will trigger the rescheduling of the night’s plan.
• Sanity: The sanity package serves to make sure
the telescope and cameras are all functioning properly and to prevent any actions that may cause
damage to the equipment. Examples include ensuring a science target is not below the horizon
limit, that the telescope will not track into a limit
during a long exposure, and checking that the
cameras are cooled. In addition, the sanity package also contains the error handling routines.
• Utilities: The utilities package contains tools
that help with the normal operations of the robot.
These tools include FITS header management,
World Coordinate System (WCS) solving, extracting best focus, and picking the best orientation for
A/B pair observations using the IFU.
3.4. Guider
The tracking/guider code for the SEDM is written
in python and uses Telnet to communicate with the
60-inch telescope guider, automatically issuing adjustments when the telescope drifts from its target. The
code is stand-alone and uses only standard Python packages with the exception of telnetlib for communication. As such it can be readily adapted for other uses.
First, a telnet connection is established with the telescope guider via hard-coded network parameters in the
main configuration file. The program then continually
searches for new images in the instrument’s data directory, downloading them when available. Once an image is downloaded, the header is checked to see if any
intentional moves or target changes have occurred. If
a target change or intentional move has occurred, the
tracking parameters are reset and a new guide-star is
automatically located. The latter is done through a custom star-finding algorithm written into the accompanying package, sedmtools This algorithm searches for the
brightest pixels in the image below a certain cap value
which it considers to be saturated. If a saturated pixel is
found, an iterative method is initiated which incrementally grows a rectangular mask to cover the saturated
region and thus prevent it from leading to further false
detections. Once a usable star is found, the coordinates
of its centroid are returned to the main method. A small
box is then defined in image coordinates and its position/size remain fixed until another intentional move is
made. For each new image until then, the same box

is extracted around the guide star and compared to the
previous image via a 2D correlation matrix, the location
of the peak of which indicates any offset or shift between
the two images. For sub-pixel accuracy, a 2-dimensional
Gaussian is fit to the correlation matrix and its peak
used as the overlap between the two images. The X
and Y offsets in image coordinates are converted into a
change in RA and Dec, and a command is sent to the
guider to nudge the telescope pointing in the opposite
direction. Finally, the X and Y FWHM of the guide star
is measured and logged for every image to keep track of
seeing and focus conditions.
4. PIPELINES

4.1. Photometric data reduction pipeline
The photometric pipeline reduces the imaging data
taken with the RC. In this section, we explain the
python based photometric reduction pipeline and calibration of the zeropoint. We describe the SEDM aperture photometry and difference imaging photometric
pipelines, used to build the lightcurves for the observed
objects.
4.1.1. Calibrations
The photometric pipeline uses standard routines for
calibrations. The bias frames, taken as part of the afternoon calibrations, are median-combined into a master
bias, which is subtracted from each science frame. We
use the IRAF routine imcombine selecting the median
value for the stacked image. Two different master bias
are created, one for each read-out mode.
The flat-field calibration uses sky flats only, as the
dome flats are not representative enough of the light
projection on the focal plane: when dome flats are used,
the structure that holds the filters creates a shadow effect on the focal plane. This effect, which is amplified at
the edges of the FOV, is not representative of the light
distribution for on-sky exposures. The problem is naturally solved by using twilight flats. Given the quantum
efficiency of the CCD and the filter transmittance, each
filter requires different exposure time to reach the optimum number of counts (∼30,000). Given the limited
twilight time, the flat fields are obtained with a range
of exposure times, favoring one filter at a time. After slicing the RC exposure into four different files, one
for each filter, the master flat for each filter is created
by subtracting the master bias and computing the median for all exposures with counts in the linear regime
(between 15,000 and 45,000). In case the calibrations
were not taken because of atmospheric conditions, the
pipeline uses the flat fields created during the previous
night of operations.
4.1.2. Reduction process

8
Night start

Night end

Compute
calibrations
No

New
images?
Yes

Acquisition or science

Image
type?

Astrometric
solution

Guider

Update guider

Run sextractor

Clean cosmic
rays
Update night
statistics

Run sextractor

mic rays. We use the python module cosmics (van
Dokkum 2001). The gain and read-out-noise for the
read (fast/slow) are used. As a threshold, an 8σ level is
used.
As part of the reduction process, also SExtractor
(Bertin & Arnouts 1996) is run on each image in order to asses the total number of sources in the image,
the FWHM of the exposure, the average ellipticity of the
sources and the level of background. This information
is used to monitor the focus of the instrument and the
overall quality of the image. A clouded exposure will
produce a low number of extracted sources.
4.1.3. Zeropoint calibration

Subtract bias

Split by filter
Flat field
calibration
Zeropoint
calibration

Is acquisition?
Yes

Create finder

No

Record field stars

End of night
zeropoint calibration

Send to difference
imaging pipeline

Aperture photometry
pipeline

Figure 8. Data flow for the nightly data reduction pipeline.

The beginning-of-night trigger activates the on-the-fly data
reduction and sends the images to the difference imaging
pipeline. The end-of-night trigger starts the final zeropoint
calibration using all the data taken during the night, and
concludes with the photometric data reduction process using
the aperture photometry pipeline.

Images produced by the RC contain all four filters, as
shown in Figure 3. At a time, the object of interest only
falls into one of the quadrants, as shown for the Crab
Nebula in this Figure. The same exposure time produces
different levels of background, and therefore each filter
needs to be processed separately. However, as a first
step, the pipeline runs Astrometry.net (Lang et al.
2010) on the complete raw image in order to obtain a
WCS solution using all filters at the same time. Because
of the low sensitivity of the u-band, short exposure times
would not allow to generate a reliable astrometric calibration for this filter only. Once the WCS is registered,
the raw image with the astrometric solution is divided
into four sub-images or slices, containing the data for
each one of the filters. Although the target falls into
only one quadrant at a time, all four slices are reduced
in order to improve the zero-point calculation.
In the next step, we run the cosmic ray rejection code,
which detects and interpolates the pixels affected by cos-

The SEDM photometry is based on the AB system
(Oke & Gunn 1983), used by the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) (Fukugita et al. 1996) and the PanSTARRS
(Magnier et al. 2016) photometric systems.
The zeropoints for SEDM are computed in two different ways: per image basis and per night basis. When
a single image is used, the central field coordinates are
used to query the SDSS/PS1 catalogues, in order to extract all stars with magnitudes 13.5−21.0 mag for g, r, i
calibration, and 13.5−19.0 mag for u-band calibration.
Two different filters are applied to these set of stars to
reduce possible contamination. We discard stars in the
pixels close to the edge of the frame. Each candidate
field star is checked for having bright neighbors (magnitudes < 20.0 or < 19 for u-band) within 1500 . Only
isolated stars are selected. Their positions are used to
test their detection in the science frame. For each star,
if there is a detection with a FWHM comparable to the
value derived from SExtractor, then the star is added
to the zeropoint calibration set. The instrumental magnitudes for the set is obtained running aperture photometry (see Section 4.1.4). Finally, the zeropoint is
computed by fitting a one degree polynomial to the instrumental and catalog magnitudes. In the X-axis, we
consider the color of the source: u − g for the u-band,
g − r for g-band, r − i for r-band and i − r for i-band.
In the Y-axis, we measure the difference between the
catalog and the instrumental magnitude. The catalog
and measurement errors are added in quadrature and
used as weights in the fitting procedure. The fitting is
done in two consecutive steps. In the first one, the data
are fit to determine the coefficients of the polynomial.
After that, we use these results to predict the zeropoint
for all the field stars, and compute the median absolute deviation (MAD) as a robust statistic to quantify
the scatter in the fit. In the second step, we discard
all measurements with errors in predicted magnitudes
larger than 3×MAD, so that we minimize the impact of
outliers. The polynomial coefficients from the second fit
are saved as the image zeropoint and color term for the

9
image.
At the end of the night, a global fit is run to obtain a
nightly solution. Our least square minimization considers the following variables: 1) the colour of the source, 2)
the average airmass of the exposure minus 1.3 (default
in SDSS calibrations), 3) the time of the exposure as
quadratic dependence, 4) the X,Y position on the CCD
as a quadratic dependence and 5) the FWHM for the
exposure.
The global least square equation for the zeropoint zp,
can be expressed as:
zp = zp0 + aC + b(ζ − 1.3) + Mcal

(1)

where zp0 is the nominal, colour independent zeropoint for a given filter, C is the colour index term (u−g,
g − r, r − i or i − r), ζ represents the Hardie airmass
and Mcal is the additional calibration term accounting
for time of the exposure (t), location on the CCD (X
and Y ) and the FWHM of the exposure.
Mcal = c t+dt2 +eX +f Y +gX 2 +hY 2 +jF W HM (2)
The coefficients a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, j are computed using the least square method. Similar to our single image
zeropoint, we use two iterations in order to reduce the
number of outliers and obtain a more reliable fit.
The coefficients from this global solution are recorded
and used as a higher quality zeropoint for photometric
nights. The RMS between the predicted and the measured values is included as the error in the zeropoint
estimation.
4.1.4. Aperture photometry pipeline
The aperture photometry pipeline is based on the
IRAF routine apphot. In order to adapt the aperture to
the seeing conditions of the exposure, we use the FWHM
derived from SExtractor measurements. The aperture
radius is selected to be 2×FWHM, so that most part
of the flux is collected. The inner sky radius is set to
four times the aperture radius with a width of 15 pixels.
The instrumental magnitude of the source, the uncertainty, and the sky background are recorded in the image header and stored in the database for that particular
observation.
The pipeline also generates a summary file with all
the science observations, along with their instrumental
and calibrated magnitudes.
4.1.5. Difference imaging pipeline
To produce host-galaxy subtracted photometry the
bias-subtracted and flat-fielded science images are processed with an adaptation of the Fremling Automated
pipeline (FPipe; see Fremling et al. 2016 for a detailed
description of the processing steps performed by the

pipeline). Our SEDM RC adaptation of FPipe contains only minor modifications, with the largest being in
the image registration step. The pipeline starts by constructing reference images from mosaiced SDSS frames5 ,
by stacking them using SWarp, to make sure that the
entire field that was observed in each science frame by
the RC is covered. The science frames are then registered to the reference mosaics using transformations
of increasing complexity depending on the number of
common point sources found in the frames. This starts
from just a rotation, scaling and shifting for less than
7 common sources, and ends with a third order polynomial transformation for above 25 common sources,
which we find necessary in some cases, to achieve an
RMS of ∼ 0.1 pixels in the registrations. The detection threshold used in SExtractor is also progressively increased, depending on the number of common
sources identified, to maximize the amount of common
sources detected while also minimizing the amount of
false-detections by SExtractor. The registration procedure described above is done in an iterative process.
We go from a low to high detection threshold and allow
up to 6 variations of our registrations to be performed.
The registration with the best combination of RMS and
number of common point-sources is then identified and
used.
After image registration, the science frames are PSF
matched to the references using the Common PSF
Method (CPM) (Gal-Yam et al. 2008). We model the
PSF in the reference frame and in each science frame
using SExtractor in combination with PSFex (Bertin
2011). Assuming that the PSF is constant across the
CCD, we clean and stack isolated sources, measuring
the PSF from the raw data. We use this model to perform the photometry on common SDSS or PS1 stars, to
find the zeropoints of both frames. These measurements
are then used to put the science and reference frames on
an equal intensity scale, after which the reference image is subtracted from the science frame, and the final
photometry is measured via a PSF fit on the transient.
Limits and uncertainties are determined via insertion of
artificial sources. Detections versus non-detections are
determined from the quality of the fit of the PSF model
to the transient (see again Fremling et al. 2016, for details). For our SEDM adaptation of FPipe we have also
added a simulation of the potential error due to the image registrations. This is done by re-doing the subtraction and photometry process after the registration step

5 The pipeline can also utilize PS1 image stacks as references.
However, the PS1 filters are not as well matched to the filters
mounted on the SEDM RC, resulting in considerably stronger
residuals for strong point-sources compared to when SDSS references are used.

10
for small shifts of the reference image with respect to the
science frame, with the size of the shifts corresponding
to the RMS of the registrations. The contribution from
the registration uncertainty to the transient flux is then
taken as the standard deviation of these results.
The turnaround time for one photometric measurement for the SEDM RC using FPipe is on the order of
90 s. Most of the processing time is consumed by the
iterative registration process.
Using SDSS references and typical exposure times, a
transient source can be followed until it fades below
∼22 mag, if in the outskirts of an extended galaxy, and
to 21 mag in the center of a galaxy core (although this
also depends on the brightness of the galaxy core). As
an example, in Figure 9 we show a reduction in the gband of the nuclear transient iPTF16fnl (Blagorodnova
et al. 2017). This event was located at the center of a
bright host (15.49 mag in the g-band in SDSS) and it
was successfully followed to 20.3 mag using the SEDM
with exposures < 300 s. In the science frame shown in
Figure 9 the transient had a g-band magnitude of 19.6,
and a SNR of above 50 at the signal peak in the difference image. We also show a simulation of the depth
that can be reached in the outskirts of this galaxy by
inserting artificial sources in the science frame and rerunning FPipe (see Panel d of Figure 9). The SNR at
peak of these artificial sources is around 5.

Figure 9. Example on a difference imaging follow-up pho-

4.2. Integral Field Unit

tometry for a nuclear transient using FPipe for SEDM on the
P60 telescope. We use the TDE iPTF16fnl (Blagorodnova
et al. 2017) as an example. Panel a) shows the first P60
g-band follow-up image from the RC. The position of the
transient is indicated by a red circle. Panel b) shows the corresponding SDSS reference image. Panel c) shows the resulting difference image between the RC exposure and the SDSS
image after registration, PSF and ZP matching. In Panel d)
we show the result of inserting two simulated sources with gband magnitude of 22 mag in the image shown in Panel a) at
the position of the green circles and redoing the subtraction
procedure.

The SEDM IFU data reduction pipeline (DRP) operates automatically to reduce the images taken by the
IFU camera. The processing flow is shown in Figure
10. The processing consists of basic image reduction,
then defining the IFU spatial and wavelength geometry
followed by the spectral reduction and extraction stage.
Extracted spectra are then calibrated using an inverse
sensitivity curve that is generated from spectrophotometric standard star observations.
An alternative pipeline for SEDM was developed in
the MATLAB environment and is available as part of
the MATLAB Astronomy & Astrophysics Toolbox6 (Ofek
2014). This pipeline was used mainly for studying how
to reduce the SEDM data given the challenges in wavelength calibration and background subtraction. The following describes the python pipeline.

Cd arc lamps. All these calibration images are taken
with the telescope at the same position to minimize
flexure offsets. A master bias image is generated from
the ten bias frames of zero exposure time. This master
bias frame is then subtracted from all images. This is
followed by a cosmic ray rejection stage that uses the
lacosmicx7 python package. This package runs using
cython, which makes this step faster than other cosmic ray rejection routines that run in native python.
We also tune the parameters such that the peaks of the
spaxels are not rejected by using the gaussy PSF model
that assumes that real objects have a Gaussian shape
in the y-direction, but are extended in the x-direction.
Once all the required calibration frames are reduced, the
spatial and wavelength geometry can be defined.

4.2.1. Basic Reduction

4.2.2. Geometry Definition

The basic calibration set is taken during the late afternoon and consists of a set of bias frames, two sets of
dome flats illuminated by a halogen lamp and by a Xe
lamp, and a set of internal arcs illuminated by Hg and

The geometry definition stage uses a set of seven
dome-flat images to define the spatial location of the
spectral traces in the CCD pixel coordinate system.
Arc-lamp image sets of Hg, Cd, and Xe arcs (seven of

6 https://webhome.weizmann.ac.il/home/eofek/matlab/

7 github.com/cmccully/lacosmicx

11

Start

New Dir?

No

Wait 1
Minute

New
Imgs?

Sun
Up?

Wait 10
Minutes

Yes

No

No

Yes

Yes

Copy New
Calib
Images

Calibs
Done?

Check for
new Images

Copy &
bias, cray,
bkg, flex
correct
No

Wait 1
Minute
Is Std?

Yes

Geometry
Calibration
Section

Solve
Geometry

End of Night

Yes

Regenerate
Calibration

Yes

Auto Find &
Extract

for each trace.
No

No

Yes

Zoom of dome flat master image with trace fits
over-plotted in green.

No

Is Auto?

Geom
Valid?

Figure 11.

Copy Older
Geom files
Interactive
Extract

Observing
Section

Apply
Calib

Calibrated
Spectrum

Figure 10.
Data flow for the nightly IFU data reduction
pipeline. The geometry calibration section is done late in the
afternoon, while the observing section is done after sunset.

each) are used to define the wavelength solution for each
individual trace. The geometry is defined using the following steps.
• Spaxel Location: The spectral traces, or spaxels, are defined using the dome flats. A series of
exposures of the dome flat patch, illuminated by
a halogen lamp, is taken and combined to remove
cosmic rays and improve the S/N of the image.
SExtrator is used to identify each spaxel segment
in the image. These segments each have a unique
segment ID and are used to derive the geometric
properties of each spaxel. Each spaxel is fit with
a second order polynomial to derive the center of
each spaxel as a function of CCD X and Y pixel
position. The width of the spaxel is retained as
well. Since the blue illumination from the halogen lamp is low, the fits are extrapolated into the
blue. Using a very low order polynomial ensures
that this will not produce spurious results. The
master dome flat image with spaxel fits overlaid is
shown in Figure 11.
• Rough Wavelengths: Seven Hg arc lamp images are combined to form a master image. The
brightest Hg lines are then identified in each spaxel
trace, yielding a preliminary wavelength solution

• Fine Wavelengths: Seven each of Xe and Cd
arc images are combined to yield master Xe and
Cd images that are analyzed to produce a refined
wavelength solution for each trace. The median
RMS for the wavelength fit residuals of all spaxels
is typically 0.3 nm.
• Spatial Projection: This fine solution is then
de-projected using the known geometry of the
hexagonal lenslets to derive an X,Y position for
each trace, relative to the spaxel closest to the center of the array, at a specific wavelength in the field
of view of the IFU. These coordinates are recorded
in pixels relative to the detector frame and in arcseconds relative to the center of the IFU.
4.2.3. Object Extraction
Once the geometric mapping of the spatial and spectral dimensions are defined, science observations can
be reduced and spectrally extracted using the following
steps.
• Flexure Correction: As the telescope is moved
around the sky, the flexure in the spectrograph
can cause the spectrum to shift on the detector
with small offsets. In order to derive this value,
science images are first registered with the spatial and spectral geometry solution for the night.
This is done in the Y-pixel direction by comparing spaxel locations in the master dome flat with
those in the science images as delineated by the
sky spectra to derive a master flexure offset in the
Y-direction. This shift has a typical intra-night
variation of ≃0.5 pix. For the X, or spectral direction, flexure is measured using one or both of
two bright, relatively isolated sky lines at 557.7 nm
(OI) and 589.6 nm (Na). This offset is typically
less than 2 nm and the two lines (when both are
measurable) typically agree to within the errors in
the wavelength solution (0.3 nm). All subsequent

12
extraction operations use these flexure correction
values to extract the spectrum from a given science
image.
• Background Subtraction: An iterative background subtraction method is applied to remove
scattered light from the IFU images. First, the
flexure corrected spaxel locations are used to mask
IFU image pixels that have been directly illuminated from the IFU. The unmasked region is assumed to contain only scattered light and is convolved with a 2D smoothing Gaussian kernel of
17 pixels width with successive surface fits for five
iterations until a good map of scattered light is
obtained. This is written out and subtracted from
the science image.
• Sky Subtraction: For fainter objects (R >
16.5 mag), a pair of images is obtained with a small
(≈ 700 ) pointing offset such that the object in one
image falls on a background region in the other.
The two images are then subtracted from one another to improve the target’s contrast against the
sky.
• Spaxel Extraction: All the spaxels for a given
image are extracted by using the traces as defined
by the master dome and corrected by the flexure
values. A raw spectrum for each spaxel is built up
by moving along the spaxel trace one pixel at a
time in the X or spectral direction and performing
a weighted sum of the image spaxels in the Y direction extending above and below the trace center
by three pixels (for a total of seven pixels). The
weighting is calculated from a normalized Gaussian with same σ as the trace in the master dome
flat image. This weighting minimizes the contamination from neighboring spaxels. The flat field
value is also divided out at this time. The spaxels for the variance image are extracted with the
identical method so the SNR can be calculated for
each extracted spectrum.
• Object/Sky-Host Location: Light for a given
object falls on a subset of all the spaxels. The
object spaxels must be defined along with a set
of sky/host light spaxels. These spaxels are then
used as a statistical ensemble to derive the best
sky/host-subtracted spectrum. Prior to object selection, a pseudo-image is formed by collapsing all
the spaxels in wavelength from 650 to 700 nm, near
the peak response of the IFU system. For bright
(R < 16.5 mag) objects, an automatic object detection algorithm is then applied to the pseudoimage and fit with a 2D Gaussian to derive the

extraction aperture. The sky spaxels are then defined based on the object extraction aperture. If
the object is a standard star, which is defined to be
a bright, isolated star, then all non-object spaxels
are used to derive the sky spectrum, after applying
a 3-sigma rejection criterion. For all other objects,
the sky annulus is defined by extending the object
aperture by 300 and excluding the object spaxels as
defined by the object aperture. This is applied
even to A and B image pairs despite of the sky
subtraction already performed due to the need to
also subtract host galaxy light.
• Interactive Aperture Placement: Since the
offsets for the A/B pair images are adjusted for
each individual object, and due to the small field
of view of the IFU, which precludes an astrometric solution, these apertures are currently placed
interactively. A graphical user interface (GUI)
displays the pseudo-image with an aperture that
tracks the mouse movement. Once the aperture
is correctly placed, based on finder charts of the
object, a mouse click registers the object location.
The GUI also provides key-strokes to expand or
shrink the aperture.
Figure 12 shows the capabilities of the SEDM to
extract both object and host spectra. All spaxels
within the field of view are eligible for extraction.
At the top left, a Type Ia SN, iPTF15drk, is shown
in the SEDM pseudo-image with the A and B apertures indicated. The resulting spectrum is shown
in the top right plot. The bottom left plot shows
the apertures for the host galaxy and the bottom
right shows the resulting spectrum. This capability is useful for checking the redshift derived from
the SN and also for checking the host subtraction.
• Spectrum Extraction: If the object is a standard star, then the Gaussian fit is extended to include 99% of the light and each spaxel is used to
calculate the mean spectrum. If the object is not a
standard, then the flux for each spaxel is summed
between 500 and 900 nm and this total flux is used
to rank order the spaxels. The brightest 70% of
the spaxels are retained for determining the final
spectrum. This prevents the faintest spaxels from
adding noise to the final spectrum. The mean
spectrum is then calculated for both the object
and sky/host spaxels. The sky/host spectrum is
then subtracted from the object spectrum and the
object spectrum is scaled by the number of spaxels used. The error spectrum is calculated from
the variance image spaxels corresponding to the
object and sky spaxels used in the object image.

13
Table 3 (continued)
17 − 18

18 − 19

19 − 20

20 − 20.5

[mag]

[mag]

[mag]

[mag]

r0

135

70

30

23

i0

120

60

30

20

4.3. Calibration
Spectrophotometric standards are observed and extracted as defined in the previous subsection. The reference flux for the standard is re-sampled onto the SEDM
IFU wavelength scale, extinction corrected, and compared with the instrumental spectrum of the standard
to derive an inverse sensitivity curve. This can then be
used to convert any instrumental spectrum into a fluxcalibrated spectrum. Anywhere from one to five spectrophotometric stars are observed during the night, and
one generally taken at the beginning of the night during
late twilight. The ensemble of calibrations are combined
to form the mean calibration after each standard star is
observed.
5. PERFORMANCE AND FIRST RESULTS

5.1. Rainbow Camera
Figure 13 shows the SNR for objects with magnitudes
13-21 in different filters. The average S/N for each filter
and magnitude bin is shown in Table 3.
Table 3. Average S/N for stars within each magnitude bin. We include only isolated point-like sources.
The results are computed for an exposure time of
180 s.
filter

17 − 18

18 − 19

19 − 20

20 − 20.5

[mag]

[mag]

[mag]

[mag]

u0

55

30

20

12

g0

180

85

40

30

Table 3 continued

u

g

3.0
2.6

102

r

i

102
101

FWHM

2.2

101
log10 (S/N)

Figure 12.
Extraction of SN and Host spectra for
iPTF15drk, a Type Ia SN. SN is at the top and host is at
the bottom. The color scale for the images on the left is
arbitrary relative intensity, with blue values being negative
and red values positive.

log10 (S/N)

filter

1.8
1.4
1.0

16

18
mag

20

16

18
mag

20

Figure 13.

SNR for each filter for a 180 s exposure. The
color indicates the FWHM on the exposure. Only observations with airmass <3 have been included into the plot.

5.2. Integral Field Unit
The IFU was designed to cover a wavelength range
from 350 to 1000 nm. By comparing standard star observations with their calibrated fluxes, we find that the
IFU total system response (telescope excluded) peaks
at ∼ 8% between 700 and 800 nm (see Figure 14). The
blue response is lower than expected from the optical
models, and its causes are discussed int eh next Section.
As a result, we typically do not use wavelengths below
400 nm for object classification.
The average S/N for the IFU is shown in Table 4.
The S/N depends not only on the system throughput
but also on any component of scattered light we have in
the system. Because of this scatter, we require to use
the A/B method for sky subtraction, which
currently
√
reduces our sensitivity by a factor of ≈ 2.
The lenslet separation projected on the sky is 0.6400 in
the RA direction and 0.5600 in the Dec direction. For the
median seeing on P60 of 1.6800 , we expect the pointspread-function (PSF) to be oversampled, which can
also lead to an additional reduction in S/N. Figure 15
shows the curve of growth for a standard star normalized to the 500 − 600 nm bandpass. Half of the light

14

Figure 14. IFU efficiency in percent as a function of wavelength in Å derived from a 300s exposure of the standard
star HZ2. We assume an area of 18,000 cm2 for the P60 and
an overall reflectivity of 82%.

Table 4. Average S/N for objects within each magnitude
bin. The results are computed for an exposure time of
3600 s.

1.0
0.8
Relative Irr

is then simply the square root of the variance spectrum.
This estimation does not include systematic errors, such
as the ones cause by the scattered light.
As stated in §1, our design goal for the SEDM was
to achieve a SNR of ∼5 for an object with an r-band
magnitude of 20.5 in an exposure of 3600 s. Table 4
gives the average SNR for 43 extracted spectra for rband magnitudes from 16 to 20 in each of three wavelength bins. This shows that we are consistently achieving the target SNR for objects with r magnitudes of
19.5, however, it is unlikely that we are achieving this
goal for objects with r-band magnitudes fainter than
20.5. The 43 objects used for this figure span a range
of types: from bright, stellar, non-variable sources to
fainter, host-involved transients. The scatter in the plot
and the variation for a given waveband are due to the
variation in the input spectra and the variation in host
involvement, which also affects SNR.

0.6
0.4
400-500 nm
500-600 nm
600-700 nm
700-800 nm
800-900 nm
HalfMax

0.2
0.0
1

2
3
Semi-major axis (arcsec)

4

5

Figure 15. Curve of growth for IFU observation of Feige 34

for five wavelength bins. The half-light radius is indicated by
the vertical dashed line and is equivalent to a seeing FWHM
of 2 00 .

for this bandpass is contained within an aperture with a
semi-major axis of 1”, which is equivalent to a FWHM
of 200 .
We calculate the SNR of the extracted SEDM spectra
in the following manner. During reduction, we create
a variance image which includes the Poisson noise from
the signal and the read noise per pixel. This is calculated
by simply adding the square of the read-out noise (5 × 5
= 25e− 2 to the input bias-subtracted image. When the
object and sky spaxels are identified prior to extraction,
these same spaxels in the variance image are used to
calculate the extracted variance spectrum. The object
variance and the sky variance are added together so we
account for both object and sky sources of uncertainty
(unless we turn off the sky subtraction, in which case we
just use the object variance). The noise in the spectrum

Wl. Range

16 − 17

17 − 18

18 − 19

19 − 20

[nm]

[mag]

[mag]

[mag]

[mag]

400-500

11.3

10.2

7.2

3.4

500-800

20.3

18.0

10.1

5.5

800-900

18.6

15.9

5.8

3.1

5.3. Improving SEDM IFU optical transmission
The optical modeling of the throughput for IFU predicted an efficiency > 40% from 450 nm − 750 nm. However, the measured efficiency on-sky appears to be only
5% at 450 nm and 8% at 750 nm (see Figure 14), with
an even larger deficiency at wavelengths shorter than
400 nm. An investigation of this situation was conducted
in summer 2017 at the Caltech Optical Observatory laboratories. The procedure involved the total disassembly
of the optical system and the evaluation of the spectral
transmission values for each component. The camera
and optical collimator assemblies were tested as units,
so as to not disturb their internal alignments.
This exercise determined that the integral-field hexagonal lenslet array contributed the plurality of all optical losses. This array has a corner-to-corner diameter
of 592µm (0.74 00 ) and focal length of 2660 µm, resulting in a fast focal ratio of f/4.5. Closer examination
of this array showed that there was an approximately
62 mum (radial) width deadband on either side of the
lenslet boundaries. Optical light falling on this “gap” is
not cleanly directed into desired micro-pupils, but rather

15

6. EXAMPLES AND EARLY SCIENCE

As noted in §1, routine operations began in late April
2016. The SEDM has been in continuous use until end
of February 2017, following which the instrument was
taken off for improvements. Over this period of 10
months the SEDM has obtained spectra of 1660 objects
of which 465 corresponded to iPTF transient objects.
The usage of the instrument has allowed us to increase
the number of classifications in 25-40% regarding previous years.
Currently, the dozen or so spectroscopic targets for
SEDM observations are specified on a nightly basis.
However, a major strength of the SEDM arises is its
low latency ∆t, defined as the time between a request
for observations and spectral classification. In a few
months we intend to implement a target-of-opportunity
mode in which requests for SEDM observations can be
made and observations undertaken within minutes (e.g.
GRB afterglow).
The latency of the observations over the last two
months is shown in Figure 16. For all transients with
an SEDM spectrum, around a third of them were observed within a day of their discovery, half of them in
less than 2.5 days and a two thirds within the first 5 days
of discovery. Some of the delays in obtaining a spectrum
are due to inclement weather conditions while others are
related to human selection criteria or the shared usage

8 www.jenoptik.com

of SEDM with other research groups. Overall, if we
compare ∆t for other transients observed with spectrographs on larger telescopes available to the PTF group
(i.e. Palomar Hale telescope, Keck, DCT, Gemini, NOT
or APO), only 20% were classified within a day of their
discovery, and the median delay time raises to 4 days.

SEDM
Other

0.30
0.25
0.20
N

is extensively scattered. The final measured median image size at the lenslet array is 2.2 00 FWHM, implying
that the deadband scatters 20% of the total area of
the image in an unpredictable manner. Such scatter removes signal from the micro-pupils, but also widely disperses noise photons into the spectrograph focal plane.
A review of the original vendor procurement specification called out a maximum fill-factor of 95%, suggesting
that the usable areal fraction of each lenslet was fabricated on a best-effort basis, and only 80% effective fill
factor was obtained.
In response to these investigation, we intend to seek
a new alternative lenslet vendor capable to delivering
smaller deadband. While the original hexagonal lenslet
design choice was made in an overt attempt to ease the
optical fabrication requirement for vendors, we believe
greater experience within the community with high-fillfactor square lenslet arrays now warrants investigation
of such a design change. At the time of this writing, the
vendor JENOPTIK8 has quoted a minimum 98% fill-factor
square f/4.5 lenslet for SEDM. Currently, we are seeking independent measurement verification of this performance to evaluate its suitability.

0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

0

5
10
15
20
Date discovery - Date spectrum [days]

Figure 16. Normalized histogram of the time elapsed be-

tween the date of discovery for a transient, and the date
of the first spectrum. Orange bars show the distribution of
time for transients with SEDM spectra and the black line
for other telescope facilities. The data for the latter were
obtained from the PTF transient database.

Among the classified transients, as expected, the most
common types were SN type Ia, followed by SN type II,
AGN, stellar sources and cataclysmic variables (CVs).
An example of these spectra is shown in Figure 17 and
the spectral log is shown in Table 5. Whenever available, the Figure also displays a spectrum taken at similar epoch with another instrument for comparison. The
sample includes SN type Ia with different magnitude
ranges, SN type II and SN Ic. It also contains novae,
CVs, and a couple of less frequent transients, such as a
super-luminous supernova (SLSN) and a TDE.
The most notable discoveries of the SEDM are: one
of closest optical tidal disruption events (iPTF16fnl;
Blagorodnova et al. 2017), an unusual subclass of type
Ia supernova 02cx-like (Miller et al. 2017), a rapidly
turning-on quasar (iPTF16bco; Gezari et al. 2017) and
a lensed SN type Ia (iPTF16geu; Goobar et al. 2017).
The SEDM can also be used for confirmation of redshifts of nearby (. 200 Mpc) star forming galaxies. The
typical precision (1σ) for the recession velocity inferred
from the SEDM spectra is 1500 km s−1 and the accuracy is ∼250km s−1 . Figure 18 shows several examples
of AGN and spectra of galaxies at different magnitudes.
The spectra are adequate enough to allow us to distinguish between passive and active galaxies.
The SEDM has been used to study stars in two differ-

16
ent ways: photometry and spectroscopy. Examples for
the former include detailed characterization of eclipses
in close binary systems (T. Kupfer et. al. in prep) such
as the one shown in Figure 20, multi-band follow-up of
binaries showing reflection effects from a hot compact
companion and complementary observations for determination of periods for variable stars. An example of
spectroscopic observations of stellar sources is shown in
the collage in Figure 19. The surprising success of the
SEDM in determining effective temperature (via model
fits to the data) have motivated us to embark on a
project to quantitatively determine the precision of the
SEDM in measuring the effective temperature as well as
the degree of reliability of spectral classification. Additionally, the SEDM has also enabled a search for emission lines sources. Two new Be stars in the open cluster
NGC 6830 were identified via their emission lines in Hα
and absorption lines of Hβ, Hγ, HeI 4471 and MgII 4481
(Yu et al. 2016).
7. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

We have presented an overview of the instrumental
design and operations of SEDM, a dedicated low resolution IFU spectrograph on the Palomar 60-inch telescope.
The instrument has been used for spectroscopic classification and photometric follow-up of iPTF transients
discovered during 2016 and early 2017. Overall, the
SEDM produces consistently classifiable spectra for tar-

gets brighter than R = 19.5 (in 1 h exposure). Although
iPTF limiting magnitude is about 1 mag deeper than
that, discoveries made during PTF/iPTF era show that
around 1/3 of all transients were detected with magnitudes <19.5 in either g or R-band. Around 40% of
all transients were brighter than 19.5 mag at peak, and
therefore suitable for classification with SEDM. With
an average rate of 10 spectra per night, the SEDM has
proven to be a useful tool for the fast initial classification
of candidates and photometric follow-up.
The versatility of the instrument has proven to be
useful in numerous applications across different astronomical fields, beyond its initial application to transient
astronomy. Given the larger sky coverage of ZTF over
iPTF: 3760 deg2 /h vs. 247 deg2 /h, we expect the SEDM
will be continuously over-subscribed once the survey becomes operational.
Currently there are around 40 optical operating telescopes larger than 3 m in the world. However, the number of smaller telescopes with diameters between 1−3 m,
is much larger, around 150. Hence, the possibility to
replicate the instrument on other 1−3 m class telescopes
could solve the “follow-up drought”, allowing new surveys to obtaining complete characterization of transient
for a magnitude limited survey, providing unbiased statistical samples of numerous transient families in our
nearby Universe.

REFERENCES
Baade, W., & Zwicky, F. 1934, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Science, 20, 254
Bellm, E. 2014, in The Third Hot-wiring the Transient Universe
Workshop, ed. P. R. Wozniak, M. J. Graham, A. A. Mahabal,
& R. Seaman, 27–33
Bertin, E. 2011, in Astronomical Society of the Pacific
Conference Series, Vol. 442, Astronomical Data Analysis
Software and Systems XX, ed. I. N. Evans, A. Accomazzi,
D. J. Mink, & A. H. Rots, 435
Bertin, E., & Arnouts, S. 1996, A&AS, 117, 393
Bertin, E., Mellier, Y., Radovich, M., et al. 2002, in
Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series, Vol.
281, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems XI, ed.
D. A. Bohlender, D. Durand, & T. H. Handley, 228
Blagorodnova, N., Gezari, S., Hung, T., et al. 2017, ApJ, 844, 46
Burbidge, E. M., Burbidge, G. R., Fowler, W. A., & Hoyle, F.
1957, Reviews of Modern Physics, 29, 547
Cenko, S. B., Fox, D. B., Moon, D.-S., et al. 2006, PASP, 118,
1396
Drake, A. J., Djorgovski, S. G., Mahabal, A., et al. 2009, ApJ,
696, 870
Fremling, C., Sollerman, J., Taddia, F., et al. 2016, A&A, 593,
A68
Fukugita, M., Ichikawa, T., Gunn, J. E., et al. 1996, AJ, 111,
1748
Gal-Yam, A., Maoz, D., Guhathakurta, P., & Filippenko, A. V.
2008, ApJ, 680, 550
Gezari, S., Hung, T., Cenko, S. B., et al. 2017, ApJ, 835, 144

Goobar, A., Amanullah, R., Kulkarni, S. R., et al. 2017, Science,
356, 291
Ivezić, v., Tyson, J. A., Acosta, E., et al. 2008, arXiv:0805.2366v4
Kaiser, N., Aussel, H., Burke, B. E., et al. 2002, in Proc. SPIE,
Vol. 4836, Survey and Other Telescope Technologies and
Discoveries, ed. J. A. Tyson & S. Wolff, 154–164
Lang, D., Hogg, D. W., Mierle, K., Blanton, M., & Roweis, S.
2010, AJ, 139, 1782
Magnier, E. A., Schlafly, E. F., Finkbeiner, D. P., et al. 2016,
ArXiv e-prints, arXiv:1612.05242
Miller, A. A., Kasliwal, M. M., Cao, Y., et al. 2017, ArXiv
e-prints, arXiv:1703.07449
NationalResearchCouncil, T. 2010, New Worlds, New Horizons
in Astronomy and Astrophysics (Washington, DC: The
National Academies Press), doi:10.17226/12951
Ofek, E. O. 2014, MATLAB package for astronomy and
astrophysics, Astrophysics Source Code Library, , ,
ascl:1407.005
Oke, J. B., & Gunn, J. E. 1983, ApJ, 266, 713
Perlmutter, S., Aldering, G., Goldhaber, G., et al. 1999, ApJ,
517, 565
Piascik, A. S., Steele, I. A., Bates, S. D., et al. 2014, in
Proc. SPIE, Vol. 9147, Ground-based and Airborne
Instrumentation for Astronomy V, 91478H
Rau, A., Kulkarni, S. R., Law, N. M., et al. 2009, PASP, 121,
1334
Riess, A. G., Filippenko, A. V., Challis, P., et al. 1998, AJ, 116,
1009

Normalized flux [erg/cm2 /s/Å]

17
a) SN Ia, z=0.02 (r=16.7 mag)
SEDM 1800s

b) SN Ia, z=0.04 (r=17.3 mag)
SEDM 2100s

c) SN Ia, z=0.03 (r=18.1 mag)
SEDM 3600s

d) SN Ia, z=0.12 (r=19.6 mag)
SEDM 2700s

e) SN II, z=0.01 (r=16.2 mag)

f) SN II, z=0.05 (r=18.5 mag)

g) SN II, z=0.07 (r=19.4 mag)

h) SN IIn, z=0.13 (r=18.7 mag)
SEDM 2700s

SEDM 600s

SEDM 2100s

i) SN Ibc broadline, z=0.04 (r=19.1 mag)
SEDM 2700s

j) SN Ic, z=0.02 (r=18.7 mag)

m) Nova (r=16.4 mag)

n) Nova (r=18.5 mag)

4000

6000

SEDM 900s

8000

4000

6000

SEDM 2700s

SEDM 900s

8000

SEDM 3600s

k) TDE, z=0.016 (r=17.4 mag)
SEDM 900s

l) SLSN, z=0.1 (r=17.3 mag)

o) CV (r=18.5 mag)

p) CV (r=17.5 mag)

4000

6000

Observed wavelength [Å]

SEDM 3600s

8000

4000

6000

SEDM 1800s

SEDM 3600s

8000

Figure 17. Sample of SEDM spectra for different transient types (black thick lines). Whenever available, long slit spectroscopy
taken at another telescope at a similar epoch is shown as a red thin line.
Sand, D. J., Brown, T., Haynes, R., & Dubberley, M. 2011, in
Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society, Vol. 43,
American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts #218,

Shappee, B. J., Prieto, J. L., Grupe, D., et al. 2014, ApJ, 788, 48
Tonry, J. L. 2011, PASP, 123, 58
van Dokkum, P. G. 2001, PASP, 113, 1420
Yu, P.-C., Lin, C.-C., Lin, H.-W., et al. 2016, AJ, 151, 121

132.03

Facility: PO:1.2 m, PO:1.5 m
Software: IRAF, PYRAF, PSFex (Bertin 2011),
SExtractor (Bertin & Arnouts 1996), SWarp (Bertin
et al. 2002) .

The SEDM was funded via NSF 1106171. This work
was supported by the GROWTH project funded by the
National Science Foundation under Grant No 1545949.
The Oskar Klein Centre is funded by the Swedish Research Council.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
APPENDIX

Normalized flux [erg/cm2 /s/Å]

18
a) AGN, z=0.082 (r=17.0 mag)
SEDM 3000s

b) AGN, z=2.4 (r=18.9 mag)

SEDM 3000s

c) AGN, z=0.04 (r=14.75 mag)
SEDM 3000s

d) AGN, z=0.2 (r=18.1 mag)

e) Galaxy, z=0.017 (r=18.2 mag)
SEDM 2700s

f) Galaxy, z=0.048 (r=17.4 mag)
SEDM 2700s

g) Galaxy, z=0.027 (r=12.5 mag)
SEDM 2700s

h) Galaxy, z=0.02 (r=18.0 mag)
SEDM 2700s

4000

6000

8000

4000

6000

8000

4000

6000

Observed wavelength [Å]

8000

4000

6000

SEDM 3000s

8000

Figure 18. Sample of SEDM spectra (black line) for different AGN and galaxies. Whenever available, long slit spectroscopy
taken at a similar epoch is shown as a red thin line.

Normalized flux [erg/cm2 /s/Å]

a) O-type star (r=11.0 mag)

e) K0-type star (r=11.5 mag)

4000

6000

SEDM 240s

SEDM 300s

8000

b) A-type stat (r=16.0 mag)

f) K5-type star (r=11.0 mag)

4000

6000

SEDM 300s

SEDM 420s

8000

c) F-type star (r=6.0 mag)

g) M0-star (r=18.2 mag)

4000

6000

Observed wavelength [Å]

SEDM 60s

SEDM 2700s

8000

d) G-type star (r=13.6 mag)

SEDM 300s

h) M5-type star (r=17.5 mag)

4000

6000

SEDM 300s

8000

Figure 19. Sample of SEDM spectra for different stellar objects (black thick lines). Generally, the stellar sources have magnitudes between 11 and 18 mag. Panel e) shows an example of an emission line star in the open cluster NGC 743.

19

15.0
15.5
R-magnitude

16.0
16.5
17.0
17.5
18.0
18.5
0

1

2
Time [h]

3

Figure 20. Lightcurve of an eclipsing binary system. The
data shown was obtained with the SEDM aperture photometry pipeline. The exposure time was fixed to 60 s. The error
bars are smaller than the size of the markers.

20
Table 5. Spectroscopic log for Figures 17, 18 and 19.
Panel

Classification

Redshift

Magnitude

tSEDM

Telescope

ttel

(mag)

(s)

+Instrument

(s)

Figure 17
a

SN Ia

0.02

r=16.7

1800

FTN

2700

b

SN Ia

0.04

r=17.3

2100

P200

300

c

SN Ia

0.03

r=18.1

3600

P200

300

d

SN Ia

0.12

r=19.6

2700

P200

600

e

SN II

0.01

r=16.2

600

–

–

f

SN II

0.05

r=18.5

2100

P200

300

g

SN II

0.07

r=19.4

3600

–

–

h

SN IIn

0.13

r=18.7

2700

DCT

900

i

SN Ibc BL

0.04

r=19.1

2700

P200

600

j

SN Ic

0.02

r=18.7

2700

–

–

k

TDE

0.016

r=17.4

900

P200

900

l

SLSN

0.1

r=17.3

1800

–

–

m

Nova

0

r=16.4

900

–

–

n

Nova

0

r=18.5

900

–

–

o

CV

0

r=18.5

3600

P200

1500

p

CV

0

r=17.5

3600

DCT

1200

a

AGN

0.082

3000

Keck1

300

Figure 18
r=17.0

b

AGN

2.4

r=18.9

3000

–

–

c

AGN

0.04

r=14.75

3000

DCT

600

d

AGN

0.2

r=18.1

3000

SDSS+2.5M

6000

e

Galaxy

0.017

r=18.2

2700

–

–

f

Galaxy

0.048

r=17.4

2700

P200

1200

g

Galaxy

0.027

r=12.5

2700

SDSS+2.5M

3600

h

Galaxy

0.02

r=18.0

2700

P200

1200

Figure 19
a

O-type

0

r=11.0

240

–

–

b

A-type

0

r=16.0

300

–

–

c

F-type

0

r=6.0

60

–

–

d

G-type

0

r=13.6

300

–

–

e

K0-type

0

r=11.5

300

–

–

f

K5-type

0

r=11.0

420

–

–

g

M0-type

0

r=18.2

2700

–

–

h

M5-type

0

r=17.5

300

–

–

21
Table 1. List of spectroscopic standard stars routinely used for flux calibration by the IFU pipeline.
Name

R.A.

Decl.

V (mag)

SpecType

BD+25d4655

21:59:42.02

+26:25:58.1

9.76

O

BD+28d4211

21:51:11.07

+28:51:51.8

10.51

Op

BD+33d2642

15:51:59.86

+32:56:54.8

10.81

B2IV

BD+75d325

08:10:49.31

+74:57:57.5

9.54

O5p

Feige110*

23:19:58.39

-05:09:55.8

11.82

DOp

Feige34*

10:39:36.71

+43:06:10.1

11.18

DO

GD50

03:48:50.06

−00:58:30.4

14.06

DA2

HZ2

04:12:43.51

+11:51:50.4

13.86

DA3

HZ4

03:55:21.70

+09:47:18.7

14.51

DA4

LB227

04:09:28.76

+17:07:54.4

15.32

DA4

