D RAFT VERSION M AY 8, 2019
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX62

The Zwicky Transient Facility: Surveys and Scheduler
1, 2

E RIC C. B ELLM , S HRINIVAS R. K ULKARNI , 3 T OM BARLOW , 3 U LRICH F EINDT , 4 M ATTHEW J. G RAHAM , 3 A RIEL G OOBAR , 4
T HOMAS K UPFER , 5, 6, 3 C HOW-C HOONG N GEOW , 7 P ETER N UGENT , 8, 9 E RAN O FEK , 10 T HOMAS A. P RINCE , 3 R EED R IDDLE , 11
R ICHARD WALTERS , 11 AND Q UAN -Z HI Y E (葉泉志) 12, 3
1 DIRAC Institute, Department of Astronomy, University of Washington, 3910 15th Avenue NE, Seattle, WA 98195, USA

arXiv:1905.02209v1 [astro-ph.IM] 6 May 2019

2 ecbellm@uw.edu
3 Division of Physics, Mathematics, and Astronomy, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
4 The Oskar Klein Centre, Department of Physics, Stockholm University, AlbaNova, SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden
5 Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA
6 Department of Physics, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA
7 Institute of Astronomy, National Central University, 32001, Taiwan
8 Computational Science Department, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, MS 50B-4206, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
9 Department of Astronomy, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-3411, USA
10 Benoziyo Center for Astrophysics and the Helen Kimmel Center for Planetary Science, Weizmann Institute of Science, 76100 Rehovot, Israel
11 Caltech Optical Observatories, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
12 IPAC, California Institute of Technology, 1200 E. California Blvd, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA

ABSTRACT
We present a novel algorithm for scheduling the observations of time-domain imaging surveys. Our Integer
Linear Programming approach optimizes an observing plan for an entire night by assigning targets to temporal
blocks, enabling strict control of the number of exposures obtained per field and minimizing filter changes. A
subsequent optimization step minimizes slew times between each observation. Our optimization metric selfconsistently weights contributions from time-varying airmass, seeing, and sky brightness to maximize the transient discovery rate. We describe the implementation of this algorithm on the surveys of the Zwicky Transient
Facility and present its on-sky performance.
politic to be quantitatively precise about how to measure sci1. INTRODUCTION
entific output.
Astronomers observe with telescopes costing millions or
Accordingly, direct, manual sequencing of observations
even billions of dollars that have finite useful lifetimes. They
by
humans remains common at both ground- and spacemust accordingly decide how best to sequence observations
based
facilities. Skilled operations staff can perform comin order to maximize the scientific output of their facilities.
plex
heuristic
tradeoffs to obtain observations that are “good
Despite its ubiquity, however, this scheduling problem reenough”
while
meeting the necessary constraints. Satisficmains challenging for both theoretical and practical reasons.
ing
in
this
manner
may in some cases be the most efficient
With hundreds to many thousands of observations to obtain
use
of
the
human
resources
available, given the difficulties
in a night or a season, the potential number of observing seof
developing
more
automated
approaches. However, manquences is combinatorically large: one thousand exposures
ual
scheduling
presents
significant
drawbacks. It is laborhave ∼ 102567 possible orderings. The need to slew between
intensive, requiring constant staffing throughout the operatargets couples distinct observations together, so maintaining
tion of the project. Any change to the schedule requires
efficiency requires scheduling many targets at once. Observmanual intervention, removing the ability to respond dynaming conditions on the ground change rapidly, and requests
ically to changing observing conditions, weather losses, and
for Target of Opportunity (TOO) observations can upend a
TOOs. Typically the scheduling process is not optimizing in
carefully tuned schedule in an instant. The quality of a poany quantitative sense, limiting clarity about its effectiveness.
tential observation may vary with time (e.g., with seeing, airBecause schedule generation is labor-intensive, it is difficult
mass, or moon phase), and many facilities must impose comto compare different observing plans. It is difficult to reproplex pointing or instrument constraints. Time-domain surduce manual scheduling outcomes, which can inhibit studveys may require complex observing sequences that make
ies of survey detection rates and efficiencies. Finally, manual
future observations dependent on when past observations ocscheduling provides limited transparency to the user commucurred, which is further complicated by weather losses and
nity about how their resources are being allocated.
other downtime. And finally it is often both difficult and im-

2

B ELLM ET AL .

“Greedy” algorithms provide a convenient entry point into
automated scheduling and are widely used in astronomy. Before each observation, such algorithms compute a updated
metric or score for each possible target, select the target with
the current highest value, observe it, and then repeat the process. Greedy optimizers are straightforward to implement,
can easily handle changes to observing plans and conditions,
provide traceable quantitative optimization, and can be run
in an automated fashion. The Astroplan package (Morris et al. 2018a) implements one such greedy scheduler. It
is designed for human observers and implements a range of
observational constraints.
However, it is widely recognized that local optimizers such
as the greedy algorithm cannot deliver global optimization.
For ground-based imaging surveys this problem manifests itself in a tendency to observe higher elevation fields as they
rise instead of fields transiting at lower elevation at the same
time. Some authors have recommended additional weighting
schemes that account for the time until a target sets in order
to penalize this behavior (e.g., Denny 2004, 2006), but this is
not the same as looking ahead to determine the optimal time
to observe a given field. Lookahead is especially valuable for
time-domain surveys, which must understand how repeated
observations of a target can be scheduled within the planning
interval.
Several projects have implemented more sophisticated
schedulers (see Solar et al. 2016, for a review). Of particular note is the scheduling approach of the Las Cumbres Observatory (LCO)1 . LCO operates a global network of
replicated 0.6 m, 1.0 m, and 2.0 m telescopes with identical
imagers and spectrographs. Rather than manually directing
their observations to a specific telescope, LCO users make
requests to the entire network, leaving to the scheduler the
task of determining which facility to use to observe a target.
Lampoudi et al. (2015) describe the scheduling algorithm,
which uses Integer Linear Programming (ILP2 ) techniques
to assign requested observations to telescopes subject to any
observability or cadence constraints. The LCO scheduler
optimizes the assignments in order to maximize the total
number of observations obtained, weighted by the priority
assigned to them by the Time Allocation Committee (TAC).
Notably, the scheduler’s ability to rapidly re-solve the entire
network within minutes allows rapid TOO observations to
be integrated into the scheduling process without disruption,
as each new optimization run starts de novo, integrating any
new targets that have arrived in the meantime.
1 https://lco.global/
2 ILP problems have variables which take only discrete integer values, linear objective functions, and linear constraints. Mixed ILP problems include
some non-discrete variables.

Solar et al. (2016) presents a similar Mixed Integer Linear Programming solution in the scheduler for ALMA. The
ALMA scheduler discretizes time into scheduling blocks and
assigns observations to them in order to maximize TACassigned scientific priorities, program completion, and telescope utilization. However, this scheme makes scheduling
some types of observations relevant for time-domain followup challenging (Alexander et al. 2017).
Finally, Naghib et al. (2018) casts the scheduling problem
of the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) as a memoryless Markov Decision Process, using hand-designed features to reduce the dimensionality of the state space and optimizing the feature weights with a simple throughput-based
objective function.
In this work we consider the specific scheduling problem
of a single-telescope ground-based wide-field imaging survey. We are focused on its application to the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF; Bellm et al. 2019; Graham et al. 2019)
project, which imposes some specific requirements (§2), but
our formalism is relevant for other time-domain surveys,
such as those conducted with the Large Synoptic Survey
Telescope (LSST; Ivezić et al. 2008), the Dark Energy Camera (DECam; Flaugher et al. 2015), and Hyper Suprime-Cam
(HSC; Miyazaki et al. 2018). Minor modifications would enable its use by multi-telescope surveys such as the Asteroid
Terrestrial-impact Last Alert System (ATLAS; Tonry et al.
2018), PanSTARRS (Kaiser et al. 2010), the All-Sky Automated Survey for Supernovae (ASAS-SN; Shappee et al.
2014), and BlackGEM (Bloemen et al. 2016).
Simply stated, the scheduling problem to be solved is to
determine which fields to observe in what order, with a goal
of maximizing an objective function (§3; here, a proxy for
the transient discovery rate) while achieving the desired temporal spacing of observations (“cadence”). Optimizing the
survey schedule provides a greater quantity of high-quality
data, increasing the scientific output of the survey. During
the development of the ZTF survey camera and observing
system (Dekany et al. 2019), the engineering team devoted
substantial effort to developing percent-scale improvements
in throughput and efficiency. Preserving these gains requires
similar attention to the operation of the survey itself. Our
approach provides a self-consistent means of scheduling an
entire night of ZTF observations.
In this paper we outline the scheduling approach used by
ZTF and its application to the surveys undertaken during the
early operations period. In §2 we outline the requirements we
used to guide our scheduler development. §3 describes the
scalar survey speed metric we optimize for and discuss its applicability to other surveys and optimization approaches. §4
presents the integer linear programming formalism we use to
optimize ZTF observations for an entire night. In §5 we describe the practical implementation the algorithm in the ZTF

T HE Z WICKY T RANSIENT FACILITY S CHEDULER
scheduler. §6 details the surveys executed by ZTF in its first
year of on-sky operations. §7 assesses the performance of the
scheduler. We conclude in §8.
2. ZTF REQUIREMENTS

The requirements for the ZTF scheduler grew from the experience of the Palomar Transient Factory (PTF; Law et al.
2009) and Intermediate Palomar Transient Factory (iPTF)
surveys. PTF used a greedy scheduler. Its objective function
is described in Law et al. (2009); it includes ad-hoc weightings for sun altitude, sky brightness excess due to the moon,
moon phase, telescope and dome slews, airmass, and a cadence term. In practice it proved unpredictable and prone
to long slews. Operations staff frequently applied manual
weights to ensure fields were observed.
For iPTF, a single member of the operations staff scheduled each night manually. This procedure reduced the number of long slews and (in conjunction with other technical
improvements) increased the overall number of exposures
taken.
During ZTF development, we began evaluating scheduling
approaches in conjunction with other efforts at maximizing
survey efficiency (Dekany et al. 2019). The vastly improved
readout speed of ZTF (8 sec) relative to PTF/iPTF (40 sec)
made limiting scheduling overheads a higher priority. Additionally, the large number of simultaneous survey programs
(§6), some of them public, also necessitated the ability to
simulate and test survey plans.
Specific requirements imposed on the ZTF scheduler included:
• Select pointings from a fixed field grid (see Masci et al.
2019)
• Operate in both simulation mode and on-sky using the
same scheduling code
• Conduct several surveys (§6), maintaining strict independence of their observations and balancing observing time between programs
• Provide interfaces for conducting Target of Opportunity observations and monitoring scheduler status
• Recover appropriately from interruptions and weather
losses
• Maximize an observing efficiency metric and prioritize
cadence control.
3. OPTIMIZATION METRIC

The ZTF scheduler attempts to maximize (§4) the total
number of exposures taken per night, weighted by the spatial volume probed by each, and subject to the constraints

3

imposed by program balance and cadence (§6). If the observing cadences are well-chosen, maximizing this quantity will
maximize the transient discovery rate. Bellm (2016) explores
the relationship between the chosen observing cadences, a
survey’s volumetric and areal survey rates, and the transient
detection rate.
Neglecting cosmological effects, the volume Vlim probed
by a given exposure is proportional to the cube of the limiting
distance dlim a transient of fiducial absolute magnitude M can
3
be detected given the limiting magnitude mlim : Vlim ∝ dlim
,
0.2(mlim −M+5)
where d = 10
pc (cf. Bellm 2016). The volumetric
weighting per exposure is thus
V = 100.6(mlim −21)

(1)

where we have absorbed constant factors and normalized to
a convenient limiting magnitude for ZTF.
This weighting combines in a self-consistent way many
factors that are intuitively relevant for assessing whether an
image is “good”: the limiting magnitude depends on the filter, seeing, airmass, and sky brightness. We use a model (§5)
to predict the variation in limiting magnitude and hence our
metric as a function of these time-varying inputs. Accordingly, our optimization will naturally select exposures near
zenith and away from the moon; but by combining them in a
single scalar the optimization can coherently trade these factors against one another as they change through the night.
Our metric deliberately does not contain factors that account for relative scientific priority or cadence. These concerns have no general quantitative relationship to our objective function or each other3 . Instead, we use the structure of
the optimization algorithm (§4) to impose these constraints.
Our optimization algorithm (§4) maximizes the summed
metric over an entire night. In cases where a greedy algorithm is more convenient, it is simple to define an instantaneous volumetric survey speed
V̇ ∝ 100.6mlim /(texp + tOH )

(2)

that normalizes the volume probed in an exposure by the time
required to obtain it, a sum of the exposure time texp and any
readout or slew overheads tOH .
Other optimization metrics will be more appropriate for
surveys such as LSST (Ivezić et al. 2008) that are concerned
with coadded depth in addition to transient discovery; these
may easily be substituted in our algorithm (§4). For instance,
Tonry (2011) suggests a weighting factor derived from information theory with a metric proportional to 100.8mlim .
3 One could imagine a global model for the information contributed by
a potential new observation given the past history of observations at that
location, but we expect that this approach would require computationally
expensive lightcurve modeling within the optimization loop and likely be
limited to a single class of objects such as SN Ia.

4

B ELLM ET AL .
4. ALGORITHM

The ZTF scheduling process begins with a set of Observing Programs. These are defined by their footprint on the sky
(a discrete set of fields, which may be larger than the set observable in one night or even one lunation); the fraction of
the telescope observing time they are allocated; the number
of nights between successive revisits to this field for this program4 (i.e., the “inter-night gap,” such as a 1-day or 3-day
cadence); and the number of visits and filter set for observations requested within a night (e.g., two nightly visits, one in
g-band and one in r-band).
At the beginning of the night, each Observing Program
provides a list of fields that are visible long enough to obtain the requested observations and have not been observed
within that program’s inter-night gap. The resulting input to
the scheduling algorithm are “Request Sets:” each request
set is a ZTF field along with the number of observations requested per filter, the exposure time per observation, and appropriate Observing Program metadata. For example, one
Request Set might be for field 123 with three g-band and
three r-band exposures tonight, all 30 sec exposures: six Requests in total. The scheduler also uses the past observation
history, the fraction of time allocated to each Observing Program, and the length of the night to determine the number of
allowed requests per Observing Program.
The scheduling algorithm then determines which request
sets are observed, at what time to schedule the constituent
observations, and how to arrange the slews and filter changes
to maximize efficiency. We use Integer Linear Programming
(ILP) techniques to solve this problem; our notation and approach is inspired by that of Lampoudi et al. (2015), but there
are significant differences which we discuss in §4.7.

4.1. Parameters
We construct the observing schedule by dividing the night
into a set of temporal blocks T . This discretization is necessary to make scheduling the entire night computationally
tractable: rather than determining an exact sequence of hundreds or thousands of exposures, we must merely assign the
observations to 15–25 blocks. The block structure also provides a useful means of applying cadence constraints and
minimizing filter changes (§4.4).
The length of the block Tblock is set to the minimum desired separation between exposures. For ZTF we set the time
block size to 30 minutes, sufficient to identify the motion of
main-belt asteroids with ZTF’s moderate image quality (∼200
FWHM).
4 Observing programs are not allowed to couple their observing sequences

to the observing history of other programs; each is completely independent.

The set of available filters in the camera is F. The set of
Request Sets from all Observing Programs P is R. For each
Request Set we use Equation 1 to calculate the volumetric
weighting factor Vrt f for an observation of that field at time
block t ∈ T for filter f ∈ F. The weight of an observation
thus changes through the night: image quality, atmospheric
transmission, and sky brightness change as fields rise and set,
and the sky brightness also changes with the motion of the
sun and moon. We approximate the weight factor as constant
within any single time block. Filter changes only occur at the
block boundaries.
4.2. Decision Variables
We solve for binary decision variables:
• Yrt f = 1 if Request Set r ∈ R has an observation scheduled at time block t ∈ T using filter f ∈ F, and 0 otherwise
We also define resultant variables used to apply constraints
(§4.4):
• Yt f = 1 if observations in time block t ∈ T are conducted using filter f ∈ F, and 0 otherwise
• Ys = 1 if the filter changes between time blocks s ∈ T
and s + 1 ∈ T , and 0 otherwise
4.3. Objective
The optimizer maximizes an objective function which
sums the volume-weighted (Equation 1) number of exposures scheduled through the night. Because of how we constrain the number of exposures in a temporal block (§4.4),
we also penalize for exposures lost due to filter changes. The
objective function is thus

max 


XXX

Vrt f Yrt f  −

r∈R t∈T f ∈F

!

tfilt
w
Ys 
texp + tOH t∈T
X

(3)
where tfilt is the time required to change filters and w is a
weight factor (≈ max(Vrt f )) accounting for the value of each
lost exposure.
4.4. Constraints
Each scheduled Request Set should have exactly the requested number of observations per filter nr f :
X
Yrt f = nr f , ∀ f ∈ F ∀r ∈ R
(4)
t∈T

Only one filter should be used within a given time block:
X
Yt f = 1, ∀t ∈ T
(5)
f ∈F

T HE Z WICKY T RANSIENT FACILITY S CHEDULER
The time required to execute the observations assigned to a
block should be less than or equal to the length of the block:
XX

Yrt f texp,r + tOH ≤ Tblock , ∀t ∈ T
(6)
r∈R f ∈F

where we have here allowed for variable exposure times per
request set. Because we have not yet sequenced the observations in a block (see §4.5), we don’t know the exact slew
times required and so use a fiducial value of 9 sec (corresponding to the limit imposed by CCD readout) for the overhead time. In practice this means a few more exposures may
be scheduled in a block than can practically be observed.
Finally we apply a constraint to limit the number of scheduled requests per Observing Program to enforce the desired
balance between programs:
X XX
Yrt f ≤ n p0 , ∀p ∈ P
(7)
r∈R,p0 =p t∈T f ∈F

where the number of allowed exposures n p for a given Observing Program p is determined each night from the fractional observing time assigned to the program, the length of
the requested exposures, and the past observing history.
4.5. Sequencing Exposures within a block
The solution to the ILP program is a list of observations assigned to each time block in the night. We use a second optimization process to sequence observations efficiently within
each block. We compute the pairwise slew times between all
fields assigned to a block, and then solve the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) as an ILP problem in Gurobi5 using the
cutting plane method (Dantzig et al. 1954). In our application the quantity to be minimized is not the total length of
the salesman’s tour, but the total time spent slewing between
fields within the block.
Since the P48 is an equatorial telescope, the slew time between fields using the hour angle and declination axes of the
telescope do not vary with time. However, slews of the dome
are azimuthal and so must be computed for each time block
individually. Because the same field may be requested by
multiple observing programs, we apply a penalty factor to
prevent the same field from being observed multiple times
consecutively within a block, reducing the redundancy of the
repeated exposures.
4.6. Re-solving within the Night
It is computationally feasible to resolve the entire optimization problem repeatedly within the night to account for
time lost to weather, TOOs, or other schedule disruptions.
5 See http://examples.gurobi.com/traveling-salesman-problem/ for a TSP
solver implemented with Gurobi.

5

However, once time is lost during the night there is a complex tradeoff in determining which observing sequences to
complete. One option would be complete some observing sequences exactly as requested and omit others entirely.
Another possibility would be accept partial completion of
the remaining request sets, but this may limit the scientific
usefulness of the observations. To avoid making programdependent decisions, we implement recomputes in a more
limited way: at each block boundary, the best un-observed
requests from earlier in the evening are reassigned to any unused time in the current block.
4.7. Comparison to other ILP Scheduling Algorithms
Our ILP algorithm differs in important ways from those of
LCO (Lampoudi et al. 2015) and ALMA (Solar et al. 2016).
Because LCO and ALMA are scheduling scientifically disparate observations, both schedulers use the TAC-assigned
priority to provide an overall objective function. Beyond simple acceptability constraints, the schedulers do not weight
by the relative quality of an observation at any given time.
In contrast, because ZTF is simply an imaging survey and
all surveys have equal priority, we are free to optimize an
objective function (§3) that explicitly and self-consistently
accounts for the time-varying quality (and hence scientific
value) of any given exposure. Additionally, because the observations scheduled by LCO and ALMA are long relative
to the time to transition between them, their scheduling algorithms do not attempt to account for these transitions. For
ZTF, readout and slew overheads account for about 25% of
any given exposure, and long slews and filter changes create
even larger losses. Accordingly our approach sequences exposures within a block to explicitly minimize the time spend
slewing, and our objective function penalizes filter changes
for the time lost.
4.8. Summary of Algorithm Features
Our choice of this ILP algorithm was motivated by its
strengths in handling cadenced observing within a night and
in balancing several simultaneous surveys (§6). To our
knowledge ZTF must attempt to execute more independent
observing programs simultaneously than any other wide-field
imaging surveys (typically five, in addition to TOO observations), so rigorous cadence control is required. The complete
night lookahead provided by our algorithm ensures that observations are scheduled for the best time in the night, accounting for the number of observations required, variations
in airmass and sky brightness, and the competing demands
of other surveys. Our ILP constraints (Eqn. 4) guarantee
that the scheduler will provide the requested number of observations if a field is observed. This capability is vital for
the success of Observing Programs requiring many observations during the night. For example, the ZTF Collaboration’s

6

B ELLM ET AL .

Extragalactic High Cadence survey (§6) requires six nightly
observations per field in two filters over three or more hours,
which would be challenging to schedule effectively without
the lookahead provided by our algorithm. The scheduler uses
the past observing history to rigorously maintain night-tonight cadences and to enforce the time allocated to the various surveys. The scheduler treats each survey uniformly and
interleaves the requested observations. The algorithm selfconsistently trades the observing time lost to filter changes
against potential improvements in the quality of the observations. Finally, while these values are only a component of our
scientifically-motivated optimization metric, we note that the
scheduler is effective at observing near zenith and minimizing slew time (§7).
4.9. Limitations
Obtaining these characteristics required accepting some
tradeoffs in the capabilities of the scheduler. Notably, our
algorithm does not enable exact cadences or filter sequences
within a night. For example, it is not possible to schedule
a g-band observation followed 12–15 minutes later by an iband observation. Rather, a total number of observations per
filter is guaranteed, each separated by roughly the time block
size (here, 30 minutes). Even that minimum separation is not
strictly guaranteed, as the sequencing of the fields within a
block is independent, and observations may occur near the
end of one block and near the beginning of the next. We do
schedule a minority of surveys that require more controlled
within-night cadences; we implement these as pre-defined
queues that interrupt the operations of the primary scheduler
(§5).
While our Traveling Salesman solution (§4.5) minimizes
the slew time within a given block, the initial block assignment does not account for the slew time between the fields.
Accordingly our algorithm cannot be said to globally minimize slew time, although in practice we find that slew overheads are small (§7).
It is possible that the scheduler does not assign enough observations to a specific block to fill it6 . This is because our
constraint on the number of observations per block (Equation 6) is less than or equal to the number of observations
that would fill the block, not a strict equality. Strict equality
creates overconstrained models that cannot be solved. In general, the scheduling algorithm is subject to the details of the
input observing programs. If a large fraction of the observing
time is concentrated on a narrow area of the sky, for instance,
there is no way for the scheduler to manufacture unrequested
observations to fill other parts of the night. In practice, we
manage this issue by simulating potential observing strate-

gies in advance when possible. Additionally, re-solves during
the night (§4.6) can fill in previously unscheduled time with
scheduled observations that were missed. Finally, we implement a “fallback queue” to ensure that useful observations
can be obtained if the main queue runs empty. To date this
fallback time has largely been used to improve sky coverage
for reference image building. Without re-solves, typically the
amount of slack in the schedule is a few percent if the input
observing programs are well-balanced.
Finally, our current scheduler implementation does not yet
dynamically adapt to changing observing conditions within
the night due to the additional operational complexity and
potential for schedule thrashing. We do not attempt cloud
avoidance, for instance, or adjust to changes in seeing. Such
extensions are possible. One approach would be to maintain the overall block structure but conduct more extensive
re-optimization at the block boundaries, and use a more dynamic selection of the next target field within a block to handle short-timescale variations.
5. IMPLEMENTATION

We have implemented the scheduling algorithm as a
Python library, which is publicly available7 under an open
source license. The scheduler code takes advantage of a
range of open-source Python libraries, including Astropy
(The Astropy Collaboration et al. 2018), Astroplan (Morris et al. 2018b), and pandas (McKinney 2010). We use the
commercial optimization package Gurobi8 (Gurobi Optimization 2018) under an academic license to perform the
core ILP optimization. While some attempt has been made to
make the scheduler interfaces telescope agnostic, the library
does encode assumptions specific to the ZTF use case.
Our objective function (§3) requires a detailed sky brightness model. We trained a gradient boosted tree model as implemented in xgboost (Chen & Guestrin 2016) on historical data from ZTF (and initially PTF). Our model predicts
the sky brightness in each filter as a function of telescope
pointing altitude and azimuth, sun altitude, and moon altitude, moon distance, and moon illumination fraction.
The scheduler library can be run both in simulation mode
(using historical weather data from PTF) as well as in operations. For on-sky scheduling, we use an aiohttp9 webserver on the primary host computer of the ZTF Robotic Observing System (ROS; Dekany et al. 2019). The webserver
calls the scheduling library and provides a RESTful interface
for command and status information.
We run the optimizer for five minutes before the start of
the night’s observations using two cores of the host ma7 https://github.com/ZwickyTransientFacility/ztf_sim

6 This is known as “slack” in the optimization literature, and is also a

feature of the LCO scheduler (Lampoudi et al. 2015).

8 http://www.gurobi.com/
9 https://aiohttp.readthedocs.io/

T HE Z WICKY T RANSIENT FACILITY S CHEDULER
chine, which yields satisfactory results without interfering
with other robotic operations. Moving the scheduler to a
dedicated host would enable us to obtain equivalent performance in a shorter time by parallelizing over a larger number
of CPUs. The Gurobi solver library offers native parallelization by initializing multiple candidate solutions on different
threads and concurrently optimizing each, terminating when
one thread obtains a solution. The memory footprint during
nightly optimization can be as high as 700 MB, dropping to
about 500 MB in sustained operations, although we have not
attempted to optimize these values.
The ROS system obtains the required evening and morning calibration observations; the scheduler is responsible for
selecting on-sky science observations. The ROS software
also updates focus through the night using telemetry from
the 2k×2k focus CCDs on the perimeter of the mosaic. Focus observations and updates occur concurrently with science
observations and do not create additional overheads.
While most (&90%) of ZTF’s Observing Programs are
scheduled using our ILP algorithm, a subset require precise
sequencing over continuous time blocks. These programs we
implement as simple “list queues” that prescribe an expected
start and stop time and a defined sequence of exposures to
take. We use this mechanism both for pre-planned observations as well as Target of Opportunity triggers. A monitoring
thread checks for the presence of such timed queues every ten
seconds and switches to the appropriate queue if its validity
window has started. If list queues are planned before the start
of the night’s observing and will take at least one complete
block, the ILP optimizer omits those blocks from scheduling
the primary ZTF programs.
6. ZTF SURVEYS

ZTF observing time is divided between three major programs: public surveys facilitated by an award from the NSF
Mid-Scale Innovations Program (MSIP; 40% of the telescope
time); surveys designed by the members of the ZTF Collaboration (40%); and surveys selected each semester by the Caltech TAC (20%). The ZTF scheduler attempts to achieve this
balance each calendar month, roughly the interval in which
collaboration and Caltech sub-programs change. The scientific goals of the surveys are discussed in Graham et al.
(2019).
All surveys select fields from a discrete field grid10 . The
current surveys all use the “primary” grid, which covers the
entire sky with an average overlap between fields of about
0.29◦ in RA and 0.26◦ in Dec. The average spacing between
fields in the primary grid is 7.2◦ North–South and 7.0◦ East–
West. Upgrades to the P48 drive motors enables slews between adjacent fields within the 8.3 sec CCD readout time.
10 See https://github.com/ZwickyTransientFacility/ztf_information.

7

The primary grid is arranged to align with b = 0◦ of the Galactic Plane to improve the efficiency of the MSIP surveys. It
also ensures good coverage of nearby galaxies (M31, M33,
M51, M101, etc.). A secondary grid, offset from the first by
roughly half a field in RA and Dec, fills in missing sky coverage due to the gaps between CCDs and provides additional
depth for sky areas covered by vignetted corners of the focal plane in the primary grid. The primary grid alone covers
87.5% of the sky; with the addition of the secondary grid,
spatial coverage increases to 99.2%.
Table 1 provides a high-level overview of the major public
and collaboration surveys.
6.1. Public Surveys
The ZTF public surveys were defined in the ZTF proposal
to the NSF MSIP program. A “Northern Sky Survey” covers
all fields with centers δ ≥ −31◦ and |b| > 7◦ . When a field
is up, on every third night it is observed once in g-band and
once in r-band, with a spacing of at least 30 minutes between
observations to discriminate between transients and moving
objects (cf. Miller et al. 2017). The Northern Sky Survey is
allocated 85% of the public time (34% of telescope time).
ZTF also conducts a Galactic Plane Survey using the remaining 15% of the public time (6% of telescope time).
Fields with δ ≥ −31◦ and |b| ≤ 7◦ are visited twice each night
they are visible, with one observation in g-band and one in rband, again separated by at least 30 minutes.
Figure 1 shows the g and r band sky coverage of the MSIP
surveys to date.
Public alerts are issued in near real-time for all sources
identified in image differencing from the public surveys
(Masci et al. 2019; Patterson et al. 2019). Additionally, images, catalogs, and direct imaging lightcurves (Masci et al.
2019) will be released in data releases beginning in 2019.
We plan to continue these surveys in their present form
through the first half of the three-year ZTF survey. At that
point we will assess the scientific returns from ZTF and the
broader time-domain landscape and evolve the public surveys accordingly11 .
6.2. ZTF Collaboration Surveys
The ZTF Collaboration defined an initial slate of surveys
for the first year of ZTF operations, although an extended
commissioning period meant that the total time the surveys
were executed is about 11 months. Five major surveys were
approved, with approximately two collaboration surveys plus
Target of Opportunity observations active at any one time.
The bulk of the time (mid-March to mid-November) was
dedicated to two extragalactic surveys: a high-cadence sur11 The ZTF MSIP PI will select the public surveys in consultation with
the ZTF Community Science Advisory Committee.

8

B ELLM ET AL .

Table 1. Major ZTF surveys, Year One. Partnership surveys transition on the fifteenth of the month. The High-Cadence Plane Survey substituted
for the Extragalactic High Cadence survey for two weeks in August 2018.
Survey

Total Survey Footprint

Inter-night Cadence Nightly Cadence
Public Surveys
3 days
1 g, 1 r
1 day
1 g, 1 r
ZTF Collaboration Surveys (Year One)
1 day
3 g, 3 r

Average Nightly Area

Time Allocated

Northern Sky Survey
Galactic Plane Survey

23675 deg2
2800 deg2

4325 deg2
1475 deg2

40% × 85%
40% × 15%

Extragalactic High Cadence

3000 deg2

1725 deg2

i-band

10725 deg2

4 day

1i

1975 deg2

Target of Opportunity
High-Cadence Plane Survey

varies
∼2100 deg2

varies
N/A

varies
&2.5 hr continuous, r

varies
95 deg2

Twilight Survey

N/A

N/A

4r

425 deg2

Asteroid Rotation Period

N/A

N/A

> 25 r

600 deg2

40% × 67.5%,
Mar.–Nov.
40% × 22.5%,
Mar.–Nov.
40% × 10%
40% × 80%,
Aug., Nov.–Jan.
12◦ –18◦ twilight,
Nov.–Feb.
40% × 80%,
Jan.–Feb.

Figure 1. Number of epochs obtained by the MSIP surveys across
the sky in g-band (blue, top) and r-band (orange, bottom) to date.

vey of 6 visits nightly (3 in g-band and 3 in r-band; 67.5%
of the collaboration time, or 27% of the total time) optimized
for the discovery of young supernovae and other fast transients, and a slow, wide i-band survey (one visit per field
every four nights; 22.5% of the collaboration time, or 9%
of the total time) designed to improve the cosmological constraining power of ZTF Type Ia supernovae. In the future,
co-adding multiple images taken by the high-cadence survey
within a night can provide additional sensitivity to faint transients as well as strongly-lensed supernovae (Goldstein et al.
2018).
Additionally, 10% of the collaboration time (4% of the
total time) was reserved for Target of Opportunity observations of gamma-ray bursts, neutrino counterparts, gravitational wave triggers from LIGO and VIRGO, and Near-Earth
Objects.
Two weeks in August and two months from mid-November
to mid-January were allocated to very high cadence observations of Galactic Plane fields. A typical observation pattern
was to alternate between two adjacent fields continuously
for 2.5 hours on two consecutive nights in r-band. These
“continuous cadence” observations enabled more sensitive
searches for short-period binaries and stellar outbursts.
For three months from mid-November to mid-February,
the period from 12 degree to 18 degree evening and morning twilight was devoted to the search for Near-Earth Objects
at small solar elongation, with four visits over a 30 minute
period in r-band separated by 5-10 minutes.
Finally, during the period from mid-January to midFebruary, a high-cadence survey near opposition will obtain

T HE Z WICKY T RANSIENT FACILITY S CHEDULER

9

New ZTF Collaboration surveys will be selected for observations in 2019.
Images, catalogs, and lightcurves for data obtained during
collaboration surveys will be released publicly during scheduled data releases after an 18 month proprietary period.
6.3. Caltech Surveys
Surveys selected by the Caltech TAC have included programs optimized for the discovery of transient, variable, and
moving objects, with particular priority given to cadences
and sky areas not being surveyed by the collaboration. As
these surveys are proposed and led by individuals we do not
detail them further in this manuscript. Data releases for these
surveys are the responsibility of the proposer.
7. PERFORMANCE

7.1. Simulated Performance

Figure 2. Number of epochs obtained by the ZTF Collaboration
surveys across the sky in g-band (blue, top), r-band (orange, middle), and i-band (pink, bottom) to date. g-band observations are
almost exclusively in the Extragalactic High-Cadence fields, and
i-band observations in the i-band survey fields. Several surveys
contribute to the r-band coverage, including the Extragalactic High
Cadence survey, the High-Cadence Plane Survey, and the Twilight
Survey.

tens of nightly observations per field in order to identify
fast-rotating asteroids.
Figure 2 shows the g and r band sky coverage of the collaboration surveys to date.

To compare the performance of our ILP algorithm to a simple greedy optimizer, we simulated the May 2018 observing programs using both optimizers with realistic weather
losses. Both algorithms attempted to maximize our survey
speed metric (Eqn. 1): the ILP algorithm optimized the form
of the objective function in Eqn. 3, while the greedy algorithm optimized the instantaneous volumetric survey speed
V̇ (Eqn. 2). Both approaches yielded comparable numbers
of exposures per hour. However, the ILP approach provided
an 9% increase in the metric (Eqn. 1) summed over all exposures. It also scheduled observations closer to zenith, with
a median airmass of 1.11 compared to 1.20 for the greedy
approach. Perhaps surprisingly, the greedy scheduler yielded
fewer filter changes, averaging 2.0 per night compared to 3.6
per night. Additionally, the ILP solution produced 4% slack
before within-night re-optimization.
The importance of the lookahead provided by the ILP algorithm is most clearly demonstrated by the sequence completion fraction—the fraction of observed fields for which the
scheduler obtains all of the desired nightly observations. Including the effects of weather losses, the greedy algorithm
completed an average of 64% of the MSIP Northern Sky
Survey observations, 79% of the MSIP Galactic Plane Survey observations, and 72% of the collaboration Extragalactic
High-Cadence observations. In contrast, the ILP scheduler
completed 81% of the requested observations for each of the
same surveys.
7.2. On-Sky Performance
The scheduler has performed effectively during on-sky operations. It has scheduled more than 120,000 observations
since the start of formal survey operations. Overall balance
between the MSIP, ZTF Collaboration, and Caltech observing programs was maintained, with 42% of scheduled observations conducted in the MSIP surveys, 40.2% in the collaboration surveys, and 18.8% in the Caltech surveys. The slight

10

B ELLM ET AL .

30

Number of nights

Number of Slews

50000
40000
30000
20000
10000
0

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

Time Between Exposures (s)

15
10

0

24

Figure 5. Histogram of the number of filter exchanges per hour,
computed on a nightly basis. Nights shortened by weather may have
no filter exchanges and hence appear as zero exchanges per hour.

Normalized Number of Images

25000
20000
15000
10000
5000
10

20

30

Slew Distance (deg)

40

50

Figure 4. Histogram of total distance slewed between observations.
The vertical dashed line at 7◦ indicates the average East–West distance between two adjacent fields in the same grid, although the
exact grid spacing varies slightly with declination.

shortfall in the Caltech programs can be attributed in part to
short intervals when no Caltech programs were available or
they did not fill the entire time allocation.
The scheduler uses the telescope efficiently, with the median time between observations of 9.9 sec (Figure 3) and
most slews of one field offset (Figure 4). The tenth–90th
percentile overhead times and slew distances are 9.4 sec–
14.9 sec and 6.0◦ –16.1◦ respectively. Repeated exposures of
the same field without slews have a median time between exposures of 9.4 sec. Filter exchanges occur less than once per
hour during the vast majority of nights (Figure 5). While
the ZTF filter exchanger hardware is designed to support a
higher rate of filter changes, our penalty factor (Eqn. 3) selfconsistently trades the need for filter changes against the time
lost during the exchange and prevents filter changes from occurring on every block boundary. The choice of optimization metric leads observations to be preferentially scheduled

ZTF
ZTF midyear
PTF
iPTF

5
4
3
2
1
0

0

0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00

Number of filter changes per hour of observing

30000

Number of Slews

20

5

Figure 3. Histogram of time elapsed between the end of one observation and the start of the next. The vertical dashed line indicates the
shortest possible time between exposures (∼9.1 sec) due to readout
time and the shutter opening and closing.

0

25

1.0

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

Airmass

2.0

2.2

2.4

Figure 6. Histogram of airmass values for ZTF (filled blue), PTF
(black), and iPTF (orange). The structured peaks in the ZTF histogram are due to the wider spacing of the fields compared to PTF.
During the late spring to early fall ZTF observed at lower airmass
(light blue histogram) due to the distribution of collaboration fields
and the shorter nights.

around zenith (Figures 6 and 7). Figure 8 shows the resulting
metric values, which vary sharply with moon phase.
The scheduler delivers the desired cadences. Eighty percent of all observations are spaced by at least 30 min as desired for asteroid discrimination (Figure 9). The intra-night
cadences for the major surveys are delivered as expected
(Figure 10), with minimal tailing to longer-than-desired revisit times.
Finally, the scheduler delivers a high fraction of completed
observation sequences, averaging 84.6% completion for the
MSIP surveys and the collaboration high-cadence surveys
(Figure 11).

8. CONCLUSIONS

T HE Z WICKY T RANSIENT FACILITY S CHEDULER

We have implemented a scheduling algorithm for widefield imaging time-domain surveys that cleanly delineates
three core concerns:

Number of Images

2500
2000

1. The intrinsic quality of a specific image, as specified
by signal-to-noise ratio or spatial volume probed (§3);
this encapsulates image quality, sky background, airmass, and related terms.

1500
1000
500
0

75

50

25

0

25

50

Hour Angle (degrees)

2. The scientific value of obtaining an image of a given
field at a specific time; these desired cadences are specified a priori.

75

3. The means of sequencing observations to maximize efficiency and throughput.

Figure 7. Histogram of hour angle values for ZTF.

dark
grey
bright

Number of Images

2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Scaled Metric Value

0.8

1.0

Figure 8. Histogram of the metric values per image. Colors indicate
tertiles of moon phase, with dark blue corresponding to dark time
(0–33% moon phase), medium blue indicating grey time (33–66%),
and light blue bright time (66–100%). Smaller scale structure is due
to the discrete spacing of the ZTF field grid: some fields transit at
higher airmasses depending on their declination.

Fraction of Observations

1.75
1.50
1.25
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00

11

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

Time Between Exposures Within a Night (hours)

4.0

Figure 9. Histogram of times between successive observations of a
field by a given program within a night.

A survey focused on a single class of astrophysical object
could combine the first two goals, trading off the information
gained from a high SNR observation now versus a low SNR
observation later, using knowledge of lightcurve shape, periodicity, etc. However, this combination is not possible for
a general-purpose, wide-field survey. Similarly, long-term
planning could account for the uncertain availability of future
observations (due to weather, instrument failures, etc.)12 .
We suggest that this formalism would provide useful clarity to the problem of scheduling observations for LSST. In
particular, we argue that an appropriate scheduler for LSST
would attempt to maximize the contribution of a night’s observing to the total coadded depth of the survey, subject to
the desired cadence constraints. This is simply the approach
developed here with a slightly modified objective function
(§3). It directly optimizes the metric of interest without
requiring intermediary features which intermix concerns of
image quality, cadence, and efficiency (cf. Naghib et al.
2018). Since the number of exposures scheduled nightly for
ZTF and LSST are comparable, our on-sky implementation
demonstrates directly that this algorithm could be feasibly
applied to LSST. Further work would be needed to adapt
our algorithm to meet all LSST requirements and rigorously
compare its performance to other scheduling approaches,
however.
The coming decade will see new surveys of unprecedented scale—imaging and spectroscopy, on the ground and
in space. To fully reap the scientific value of these large
investments, astronomers must give sustained attention to
the scheduling problems unique to each survey. Crossfertilization with research in the field of Operations Research
may be of particular value. Different surveys will necessarily require different algorithms and metrics, but thanks to increasingly powerful computing resources, new optimization
approaches are now feasible. Careful attention to scheduling
12 i.e., “Expected Future-Discounted Information Gain” (Hogg 2018).

B ELLM ET AL .

Northern Sky Survey
Galactic Plane Survey

Fraction of Observations

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

2

4

6

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

8

Nights Between Observations (Days)

I-Band
Extragalactic High Cadence

0.8

Fraction of Observations

12

2

4

6

8

Nights Between Observations (Days)

Figure 10. Histogram of times between successive observations of a field by a given program from night to night. Left: MSIP Northern Sky
Survey (3-day cadence) and Galactic Plane Survey (1-day cadence). Right: Partnership i-Band Survey (4-night cadence) and Extragalactic
High Cadence Survey (1-day cadence). Revisit times longer than the target cadence are due to weather and scheduling effects.

Number of Observations

25000

Extragalactic High Cadence
Galactic Plane Survey
Northern Sky Survey

20000
15000
10000
5000
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Fraction of Requested Observations Completed

1.0

Figure 11. Histogram of fractional sequence completion for the
major ZTF surveys. The MSIP Northern Sky Survey (All Sky) and
Galactic Plane Survey (Nightly Plane) each request two observations per field, so have fractional completion of 0.5 or 1.0 on nights
the field is observed. The collaboration Extragalactic High Cadence
Survey (High Cadence) has six observations nightly, so the fractional completion can range from 1/6–6/6.

can provide some of the most cost-effective improvements in
science throughput available.
ECB thanks Eric Saunders, Ben Shappee, Lynne Jones,
and Peter Yoachim for useful conversations.
Based on observations obtained with the Samuel Oschin
Telescope 48-inch and the 60-inch Telescope at the Palomar Observatory as part of the Zwicky Transient Facility
project. ZTF is supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. AST-1440341 and a collaboration including Caltech, IPAC, the Weizmann Institute for
Science, the Oskar Klein Center at Stockholm University,
the University of Maryland, the University of Washington,
Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron and Humboldt University, Los Alamos National Laboratories, the TANGO Program of the University System of Taiwan, the University of

Wisconsin at Milwaukee, and Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratories. Operations are conducted by COO, IPAC, and
UW.
ECB is supported in part by the NSF AAG grant 1812779
and grant #2018-0908 from the Heising-Simons Foundation.
ECB also acknowledges support from the Large Synoptic
Survey Telescope, which is supported in part by the National Science Foundation through Cooperative Agreement
1258333 managed by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA), and the Department of Energy
under Contract No. DE-AC02-76SF00515 with the SLAC
National Accelerator Laboratory. Additional LSST funding
comes from private donations, grants to universities, and inkind support from LSSTC Institutional Members. ECB is
grateful for further support from the University of Washington College of Arts and Sciences, Department of Astronomy,
and the DIRAC Institute. University of Washington’s DIRAC
Institute is supported through generous gifts from the Charles
and Lisa Simonyi Fund for Arts and Sciences, and the Washington Research Foundation.
EOO is grateful for support by grants from the Willner Family Leadership Institute, Ilan Gluzman (Secaucus
NJ), the Israel Science Foundation, Minerva, BSF, BSFtransformative, Weizmann-UK, and the I-Core program by
the Israeli Committee for Planning and Budgeting and the
Israel Science Foundation (ISF).

Facilities: PO:1.2m
Software:
Astropy (The Astropy Collaboration
et al. 2018), Astroplan (Morris et al. 2018b), Numpy
(Van Der Walt et al. 2011), Scipy (Jones et al. 2001),
pandas (McKinney 2010), Matplotlib (Hunter 2007),
Seaborn (Waskom et al. 2018), Scikit-Learn (Pedregosa et al. 2011), xgboost (Chen & Guestrin 2016),
Gurobi (Gurobi Optimization 2018), makecite (PriceWhelan et al. 2018)

T HE Z WICKY T RANSIENT FACILITY S CHEDULER

13

REFERENCES
Alexander, K. D., Berger, E., Bower, G., et al. 2017, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1703.04692. https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.04692
Bellm, E. C. 2016, PASP, 128, 084501
Bellm, E. C., Kulkarni, S. R., Graham, M. J., et al. 2019, PASP,
131, 018002, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aaecbe
Bloemen, S., Groot, P., Woudt, P., et al. 2016, in Proc. SPIE, Vol.
9906, Ground-based and Airborne Telescopes VI, 990664,
doi: 10.1117/12.2232522
Chen, T., & Guestrin, C. 2016, in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining, KDD ’16 (New York, NY, USA: ACM),
785–794, doi: 10.1145/2939672.2939785.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2939672.2939785
Dantzig, G., Fulkerson, R., & Johnson, S. 1954, Journal of the
Operations Research Society of America, 2, 393
Dekany, R., Smith, R. M., Feeney, M., Riddle, R., et al. 2019
Denny, R. B. 2004, Society for Astronomical Sciences Annual
Symposium, 23, 35
—. 2006, Dispatch Scheduling of Automated Telescopes,
http://scheduler.dc3.com/Scheduler2006.pdf
Flaugher, B., Diehl, H. T., Honscheid, K., et al. 2015, AJ, 150, 150
Goldstein, D. A., Nugent, P. E., & Goobar, A. 2018, ArXiv
e-prints, arXiv:1809.10147
Graham, M. J., Kulkarni, S. R., Bellm, E. C., et al. 2019, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:1902.01945
Gurobi Optimization, L. 2018, Gurobi Optimizer Reference
Manual. http://www.gurobi.com
Hogg, D. 2018, information, interpretability, emulation,
isocurvature, http://hoggresearch.blogspot.com/2018/11/
information-interpretability-emulation.html
Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing In Science & Engineering, 9, 90
Ivezić, v., Tyson, J. A., Acosta, E., et al. 2008, ArXiv e-prints,
arXiv:0805.2366v4. https://arxiv.org/abs/0805.2366v4
Jones, E., Oliphant, T., Peterson, P., et al. 2001, SciPy: Open
source scientific tools for Python. http://www.scipy.org/
Kaiser, N., Burgett, W., Chambers, K., et al. 2010, in Proc. SPIE,
Vol. 7733, Ground-based and Airborne Telescopes III, 77330E
Lampoudi, S., Saunders, E., & Eastman, J. 2015, ArXiv e-prints.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.07170

Law, N. M., Kulkarni, S. R., Dekany, R. G., et al. 2009, PASP,
121, 1395. https://arxiv.org/abs/0906.5350
Masci, F. J., Laher, R. R., Rusholme, B., et al. 2019, PASP, 131,
018003, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aae8ac
McKinney, W. 2010, in Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science
Conference, ed. S. van der Walt & J. Millman, 51 – 56
Miller, A. A., Kasliwal, M. M., Cao, Y., et al. 2017, ApJ, 848, 59,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa8c7e
Miyazaki, S., Komiyama, Y., Kawanomoto, S., et al. 2018, PASJ,
70, S1
Morris, B. M., Tollerud, E., Sipőcz, B., et al. 2018a, AJ, 155, 128,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aaa47e
—. 2018b, AJ, 155, 128, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aaa47e
Naghib, E., Yoachim, P., Vanderbei, R. J., Connolly, A. J., & Jones,
R. L. 2018, ArXiv e-prints. https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04815
Patterson, M. T., Bellm, E. C., Rusholme, B., et al. 2019, PASP,
131, 018001, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aae904
Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., et al. 2011, Journal of
machine learning research, 12, 2825
Price-Whelan, A., Mechev, A., & jumeroag. 2018, adrn/makecite:
v0.1, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.1343295.
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1343295
Shappee, B. J., Prieto, J. L., Grupe, D., et al. 2014, ApJ, 788, 48
Solar, M., Michelon, P., Avarias, J., & Garces, M. 2016,
Astronomy and Computing, 15, 90
The Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Sipőcz, B. M.,
et al. 2018, AJ, 156, 123, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aabc4f
Tonry, J. L. 2011, PASP, 123, 58. https://arxiv.org/abs/1011.1028
Tonry, J. L., Denneau, L., Heinze, A. N., et al. 2018, PASP, 130,
064505
Van Der Walt, S., Colbert, S. C., & Varoquaux, G. 2011, ArXiv
e-prints, arXiv:1102.1523. https://arxiv.org/abs/1102.1523
Waskom, M., Botvinnik, O., O’Kane, D., et al. 2018, Seaborn
v0.9.0, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.1313201.
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1313201

