 Early Science Program | Rubin Observatory Toggle search Search the website Submit search Localize site content Spanish About About History Who was Vera Rubin? Rubin in Chile Rubin in Chile Cerro Pachón Observatory Site Selection Organization Organization Leadership Science Collaborations Funding Information Work With Us Work With Us Jobs Board Explore Explore Rubin Basics Science Goals How Rubin Works How Rubin Works Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST) Rubin Technology Alert Stream Rubin Numbers Rubin Voices Skyviewer ↗ Skyviewer ↗ Skysynth: The cosmos captured by Rubin, for your ears Orbitviewer ↗ Get Involved in Rubin Research Activities, Games, and More Activities, Games, and More Space Surveyors Game Animated Video Series Gallery Gallery Collections Main Gallery Featured Media News Gallery First Look Graphics & Illustrations Outreach & Education Image Releases Image Releases Rubin's COSMOS Rubin's Ocean of Stars Rubin Observatory First Look Slideshows Construction Archive Gallery Media Use Policy News News Press Releases Media Resources Media Resources Press Releases Name Guidelines For Scientists For Scientists Get started News, events, and deadlines News, events, and deadlines Rubin Science Assemblies Rubin Data Academy Rubin Community Workshop Resources for scientists Resources for scientists Rubin Community Forum Early Science Program Workshops and seminars Tutorials Additional compute resources Gemini time for alert follow-up LSST Discovery Alliance Public outreach materials For amateur astronomers Survey, instruments, and telescopes Survey, instruments, and telescopes Key numbers Live status The Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST) Instruments Telescopes Data products, pipelines, and services Data products, pipelines, and services Data Policy Data access and analysis Recent data releases Alerts and brokers Data processing pipelines User-contributed resources Future data products Simulation software Documentation and publications Documentation and publications Technical documentation How to cite Rubin Observatory Publication policies Glossary & Acronyms Papers citing Rubin Observatory Science Collaborations Science Collaborations Galaxies Science Collaboration Stars, Milky Way, and Local Volume Science Collaboration Solar System Science Collaboration Dark Energy Science Collaboration Active Galactic Nuclei Science Collaboration Transients and Variable Stars Science Collaboration Strong Lensing Science Collaboration Informatics and Statistics Science Collaboration Citizen Science Committees and teams Committees and teams Science Advisory Committee (SAC) Survey Cadence Optimization Committee (SCOC) Users Committee Target of Opportunity (ToO) Advisory Board Resource Allocation Committee (RAC) Community Science Team (CST) Research Inclusion Working Group (RIWG) Project Science Team (PST) In Kind Program In Kind Program In-Kind Program FAQs Frequently Asked Questions Frequently Asked Questions Impacts from artificial satellites and debris How to navigate this website Code of Conduct Code of Conduct Interim CoC Education Education First Look Resources for Lasting Impact Education FAQs Educators Glossary Investigations Calendar Localize site content Spanish Toggle search Search the website Submit search Toggle navigation menu Contact Us Jobs Board Intranet Visual Identity Guide Privacy Policy The U.S. National Science Foundation ( NSF ) and the U.S. Department of Energy ( DOE ) Office of Science will support Rubin Observatory in its operations phase to carry out the Legacy Survey of Space and Time. They will also provide support for scientific research with the data. During operations, NSF funding is managed by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy ( AURA ) under a cooperative agreement with NSF, and DOE funding is managed by SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory ( SLAC ), under contract by DOE. Rubin Observatory is operated by NSF NOIRLab and SLAC. NSF is an independent federal agency created by Congress in 1950 to promote the progress of science. NSF supports basic research and people to create knowledge that transforms the future. The DOE Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. Let's Connect Visit the Rubin Observatory on Facebook Visit the Rubin Observatory on Instagram Visit the Rubin Observatory on LinkedIn Visit the Rubin Observatory on Twitter Visit the Rubin Observatory on YouTube For Scientists Resources for scientists Early Science Program Early Science Program Date last updated: 27 Jul 2026 15:58 (MST) "Early science" is defined as any science enabled by Rubin for its community prior to the first annual data release, Data Release 1 (DR1), of the Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST). The goal of the program is to support the community as they develop their LSST analysis software and workflows, and to enable high-impact science as soon as possible The program includes: a series of Data Previews produced by reprocessing of science-grade commissioning data, a progressive ramp-up of the alert stream and Prompt Products availability, and an incremental template-generation strategy to support alert production. This page summarizes "Rubin Observatory Plans for an Early Science Program", Rubin Tech Note 11 (RTN-011; https://doi.org/10.71929/rubin/2584021 ). Go to "Rubin Observatory Plans for an Early Science Program", RTN-011. Data previews A series of data releases that progressively increase in size and complexity as a ramp up to the first annual data release. Data Preview 0 (DP0): Simulated LSST-like datasets Available now ( dp0.lsst.io ). Includes simulated images and catalogs for Galactic and extragalactic objects (including variable stars and supernovae), and catalogs of moving objects. Data Preview 1 (DP1): LSSTComCam commissioning Available now ( dp1.lsst.io ). Based on images from the seven-week on-sky campaign with the LSST Commissioning Camera (LSSTComCam), 24 October 2024 to 11 December 2024. DP1 covers seven small fields with a range of stellar densities, depths, and cadences, and offers small versions of most image and catalog types to help prepare scientific analyses and workflows. Data Preview 2 (DP2) : LSSTCam commissioning and Science Validation surveys "Early DP2" release date: available now (released July 27 2026; dp2.lsst.io ). In the early phase, deep coadded images and all catalogs will be available. Complete DP2 target: Oct-Dec 2026 , when visit and difference images will become available. This phased delivery reflects a bandwidth constraint in Rubin’s hybrid cloud architecture (Section 3.3 of RTN-011 ). DP2 will be based on commissioning and small-field survey visits with LSSTCam obtained between April 2025 and January 2026. DP2 covers the Deep Drilling Fields (DDFs), small-field survey regions, and a contiguous region of deeply coadded images that is ~3000 square degrees. See also Section 2 and 3.3 of RTN-011 for more general information, and RTN-111 for a quantitative summary. Resources to learn more about the history and progression of commissioning and the SV surveys: Science Validation survey summary (as of 30 September 2025) weekly technical updates about commissioning nightly scheduler reports Prompt data products Some Prompt products are available now: prompt-products.lsst.io . Prompt data products are the result of Difference Image Analysis (DIA). They include the alerts; the visit and difference images; and catalogs of difference-image detections and their associated measurements. Alert production and template generation Alerts began streaming in February 2026. Prior to DR1, the alert stream cannot run at full scale because DIA requires template images, which would typically be constructed as part of an annual data release. In order to produce alerts on a limited scale, templates are being generated from commissioning and early operations data. Learn more about alerts and brokers . Solar System discoveries New solar system objects discovered by Rubin Observatory are being reported to the Minor Planet Center on an ad-hoc basis. Prompt Products Database (PPDB) Target: Sep-Oct 2026. The catalogs that result from Prompt processing are stored in the PPDB. These contents are very similar to the cumulative content in all released alerts. Prompt images and direct source Target: Oct-Dec 2026. Prompt-processed visit images and difference images will be subject to the 80-hour embargo period. As a temporary measure to support Early Science, source detection will be run on all Prompt-processed visit images and the results made available as a source catalog that accompanies the visit images on an 80-hour timescale. This temporary measure would end with the release of DR1. See Section 4 of RTN-011 for details on the Prompt data products. Go to the page of all data releases. Data Release 1 (DR1) Anticipated by the end of June 2028, one year after the end of the first year of LSST, which started 2026 June 29. To be based on the first year of data taken as part of the 10-year LSST survey. Processing is anticipated to take one full year, and will deliver the full suite of data products. Questions? Use the Support and Early Science categories in the Rubin Community Forum. Rubin Community Forum Ask questions, get help, report bugs or errors, and join in discussions about Rubin Observatory and its data products, pipelines, and services. Go to the Rubin Community Forum 