Draft version September 30, 2021
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX63

ParSNIP: Generative Models of Transient Light Curves with Physics-Enabled Deep Learning
Kyle Boone

1

1 DiRAC Institute, Department of Astronomy, University of Washington, 3910 15th Ave NE, Seattle, WA, 98195, USA

arXiv:2109.13999v1 [astro-ph.IM] 28 Sep 2021

(Received May 21, 2021; Revised September 8, 2021; Accepted September 24, 2021)

Submitted to AJ
ABSTRACT
We present a novel method to produce empirical generative models of all kinds of astronomical transients from datasets of unlabeled light curves. Our hybrid model, that we call ParSNIP, uses a neural
network to model the unknown intrinsic diversity of different transients and an explicit physics-based
model of how light from the transient propagates through the universe and is observed. The ParSNIP
model predicts the time-varying spectra of transients despite only being trained on photometric observations. With a three-dimensional intrinsic model, we are able to fit out-of-sample multiband light
curves of many different kinds of transients with model uncertainties of 0.04–0.06 mag. The representation learned by the ParSNIP model is invariant to redshift, so it can be used to perform photometric
classification of transients even with heavily biased training sets. Our classification techniques significantly outperform state-of-the-art methods on both simulated (PLAsTiCC) and real (PS1) datasets
with 2.3× and 2× less contamination respectively for classification of Type Ia supernovae. We demonstrate how our model can identify previously-unobserved kinds of transients and produce a sample
that is 90% pure. The ParSNIP model can also estimate distances to Type Ia supernovae in the PS1
dataset with an RMS of 0.150 ± 0.007 mag compared to 0.155 ± 0.008 mag for the SALT2 model on the
same sample. We discuss how our model could be used to produce distance estimates for supernova
cosmology without the need for explicit classification.
Keywords: Classification — Transient sources — Supernovae
1. INTRODUCTION

Upcoming surveys such as the Legacy Survey of Space
and Time (LSST; Ivezić et al. 2019) that will be conducted at the Vera C. Rubin Observatory, and the
Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope (Spergel et al.
2015) will obtain light curves for millions of astronomical
transients. These large datasets will enable many novel
science applications. The number of observed Type Ia
supernovae (SNe Ia) will increase by more than two orders of magnitude compared to current samples (LSST
Science Collaboration et al. 2009; Scolnic et al. 2018).
These large samples of SNe Ia will be used to constrain
cosmological parameters both by improving measurements of the expansion history of the universe and by
performing novel measurements of local peculiar velocity
Corresponding author: Kyle Boone
kyboone@uw.edu

field (Graziani et al. 2020). These surveys will also observe large numbers of other kinds of transients, such as
superluminous supernovae (SLSN), which will be helpful
both to elucidate the origins of these transients (Villar
et al. 2018) and to use them as new cosmological probes
(Scovacricchi et al. 2016). It is also likely that new kinds
of rare transients that have not previously been observed
will be discovered in the datasets from these surveys.
All of these science applications rely on being able
to extract information from light curves and distinguish
between light curves of different kinds of transients. Observations can be compared directly to simulations and
theory (Kerzendorf et al. 2021), but these models are
not currently accurate enough to characterize observed
light curves at the precision required for many science
applications. For SNe Ia, a range of different empirical
models have been created to describe their light curves
and spectra (Guy et al. 2007; Saunders et al. 2018; Léget
et al. 2020; Mandel et al. 2020). These are generative

2
models in that they predict the full time-varying spectrum of a transient in terms of a small number of parameters whose distribution is reasonably well known.
These models all include explicit descriptions of how
the light propagates through the universe and is observed on a detector. Propagation effects include redshifting of the light from the transient, dust along the
line of sight, and luminosity variation due to effects such
as weak gravitational lensing. A light curve can be observed with different cadences, with different telescopes,
in different bandpasses, at different signal-to-noises, or
at different times. All of these effects will change the
observed light curve for a transient, but they do not
affect the intrinsic physics of the underlying transient.
We therefore refer to them as “symmetries”. By explicitly handling these symmetries, the previously-described
models of SNe Ia obtain consistent values of the model
parameters when fitting light curves observed under different conditions. In particular, these models can obtain
consistent estimates of the luminosity when fitting light
curves at different redshifts which is essential for estimating distances to SNe Ia.
Similar models do not exist for other kinds of transients. Instead, previous work using light curves of nonSNe Ias has typically focused on extracting features from
the light curves rather than building a generative model.
Features can be extracted by fitting an empirical functional form to the light curve (Bazin et al. 2009; Sanders
et al. 2015), by fitting parameters of a theoretical model
to match the light curve (Guillochon et al. 2018), by
estimating a smooth approximation to the light curve
from which arbitrary empirical features can be measured
(Lochner et al. 2016; Boone 2019; Alves et al. 2021), or
by using a neural network (Muthukrishna et al. 2019;
Möller & de Boissière 2020). These methods produce a
large number of features that can be used to characterize
a given light curve, but these features are not typically
invariant to the symmetries of how the light curve was
observed. In particular, the features produced by all of
these models tend to be highly dependent on redshift.
This is a major challenge for science applications such as
photometric classification where labeled datasets tend to
be heavily biased towards bright, low-redshift transients
(Lochner et al. 2016; Boone 2019).
In this work, we address these challenges by building
a generative model of all transient light curves that is
invariant to observing conditions. Most techniques that
have previously been used to build generative models of
SNe Ia assume that the diversity of SNe Ia can be described by a simple linear model. Such models provide
a good description of most normal SNe Ia, but they fail
to describe peculiar SNe Ia (Boone et al. 2021a,b) and

Boone
are not flexible enough to describe most other kinds of
transients. Furthermore, the techniques used to build
these models require large datasets of well-measured
light curves and spectra (Betoule et al. 2014) that are
not available for transients other than SNe Ia.
Instead, we learn a generative model directly from
large samples of light curves using a modified version
of a variational autoencoder (VAE; Kingma & Welling
2014). A VAE learns a low-dimensional representation
of its input that we call a latent space. First, an encoder
model uses variational inference to approximate the posterior distribution over the latent space for a given input. A generative model, also referred to as a decoder,
then reconstructs the input given a point in the latent
space. The VAE can be trained by applying both the
encoder and decoder to a given input and by comparing
the original input to the reconstructed one.
Autoencoders have previously been applied to astronomical light curves (Naul et al. 2018; Pasquet et al.
2019; Martı́nez-Palomera et al. 2020; Villar et al. 2020,
2021) and shown to be effective for tasks such as photometric classification and outlier identification. However, these models do not include explicit descriptions
of observing symmetries, so the same transient observed
under different conditions (e.g. redshift) will be assigned to different locations in the latent space. In this
work, we produce a hybrid physics-VAE model where
we use a neural network to describe the intrinsic timevarying spectra of astronomical transients and an explicit physical model for known symmetries. Our model
produces a three-dimensional representation of the intrinsic diversity of transients that is insensitive to observing conditions, including redshift. We call the resulting model “ParSNIP” (Parameterization of SuperNova Intrinsic Properties).
We describe the datasets that we use for this work in
Section 2. In Section 3, we describe the ParSNIP model
and how it is trained. We evaluate the performance of
the ParSNIP model as a generative model in Section 4
and show how it is able to learn the full time-varying
spectra for transients despite only being trained on light
curve data. In Section 5, we show how the ParSNIP
model achieves state-of-the-art performance for tasks
such as photometric classification, identification of new
transients, or cosmological distance estimation. Finally,
in Section 6 we discuss how the ParSNIP model can be
applied to other datasets and how it could be improved.
2. DATASET

We evaluate the techniques described in this work
on two different datasets of supernova-like light curves.
First, we use a dataset of observed supernova-like light

ParSNIP: Generative Models of Transient Light Curves
curves from the Pan-STARRS1 Medium-Deep Survey
(PS1) (Chambers et al. 2016), the details of which are
described in Villar et al. (2020). This dataset contains
2,885 light curves with host-galaxy redshifts of which
557 have spectroscopically-confirmed types. The light
curves were observed in the Pan-STARRS g, r, i, and z
bandpasses with a cadence of ∼7 days per filter.
We also evaluate the ParSNIP model on the PLAsTiCC dataset of simulated light curves described in
(Kessler et al. 2019). This dataset contains 3,006,109
simulated supernova-like light curves with observations
in the Rubin Observatory’s u, g, r, i, z, and y bandpasses, and the authors aimed to simulate a realistic
dataset of light curves from three years of operation of
the Rubin Observatory. This simulation consists of two
distinct surveys. The vast majority of the light curves
(2,972,316) are from the Wide-Fast-Deep (WFD) survey
which covers around half of the sky with observations
roughly twice per week in at least one of the six bandpasses. 33,793 light curves are from the Deep-DrillingFields (DDF) survey which covers ∼50 deg2 with significantly deeper and more frequent observations. The
authors of the PLAsTiCC dataset also simulated a spectroscopic followup strategy which produces type labels
for 5,153 of the light curves in this dataset. This labeled
dataset is highly biased towards bright transients, and
has a mean redshift of 0.32 compared to 0.50 for the full
dataset.
For this analysis, we assume that the redshifts of all
of the transients are known. This assumption is not required for our analysis, but it does simplify our methodology. We will discuss how our methods can be applied
to datasets where the redshift is not available in Section 6.3.
We restrict our analysis to supernova-like light curves.
By this, we mean that we consider any extragalactic
light curves where there is an excess of flux for a single well-defined time period, and where the light curve
has a stable background level before and after this time
period. The PS1 dataset that we use was already restricted to these kinds of light curves. For the PLAsTiCC dataset, we reject all of the galactic and AGN
light curves but keep all other kinds of transients.
2.1. Preprocessing
To preprocess our light curves, we first make a rough
estimate of the time of maximum light of the light curve
by taking the median time of the five highest signal-tonoise observations in the light curve. In each bandpass,
we estimate the background level using a biweight estimator (Beers et al. 1990) on all observations at least
250 days from our estimated time of maximum light.

3

We subtract this estimate of the background level from
each light curve. For the PS1 dataset, we also correct
the light curves for Milky Way extinction using the dust
map from Schlafly & Finkbeiner (2011).
Neural networks typically perform better if their inputs have a limited range, but flux values can vary over
many orders of magnitude. To address this, we normalize the brightness of each light curve by its maximum
flux in observations in any band with a signal-to-noise
of at least five. After this procedure, most flux values
lie between zero and one. We record the normalization
scale, and use it in future analyses such as distance estimation.
We find that the statistical uncertainties that are reported for both the PLAsTiCC and PS1 datasets heavily underestimate the true uncertainties for very high
signal-to-noise observations. This is partially due to uncertainties in our background subtraction procedure. To
prevent these underestimated uncertainties from having
excessively large weights in our model, we add an error
floor of 0.01 to all of our flux uncertainties when training the model. With our normalization, this roughly
corresponds to an error floor of 1% of the peak flux.
Astronomical light curves are typically sparsely sampled, but most neural network architectures require inputs that are sampled on an evenly-spaced grid. To be
able to use these architectures, we evaluate our light
curves on a grid following a procedure similar to the one
described in Pasquet et al. (2019). Note that astronomical observations from a given telescope typically only
occur during a short time interval each night when the
target is near the zenith. All observations of the same
target will be separated in time by some integer number
of sidereal days with residuals of only ∼1 hour. We can
therefore evaluate the light curve on a grid of sidereal
days and preserve almost all of the temporal information.
For each transient, we build a grid of observations
that has a length of 300 sidereal days centered on the
estimated time of maximum light. The grid has rows
for the flux and inverse flux variance in each bandpass.
For nights where the transient was observed in a given
bandpass, we include the observed flux value and inverse
flux variance in the grid. For nights when the transient
was not observed, we simply input zero for both the
flux and inverse flux variance. We also include one row
in the grid for the redshift, with the same value repeated
at all times. After this procedure, our light curves are
represented by a two-dimensional grid of size 300×(2N +
1) where N is the number of bandpasses that we are
modeling. We can then use standard neural network
architectures to process our light curves.

4

Boone
3. METHODS

3.1. Overview
The overall design goal for our model is to build a representation of the diversity of transients that disentangles intrinsic diversity related to the physics of the transient from diversity related to the symmetries of how the
transient was observed. A transient should be assigned
the same intrinsic representation regardless of how it was
observed. In particular, we would like for out model to
be invariant to redshift, meaning that a transient is assigned the same intrinsic representation regardless of the
redshift that it is observed at.
Many different approaches exist for modeling disentangled representations with autoencoders (Tschannen
et al. 2018). These approaches mostly rely on either
using a supervised training procedure (which would require labels that we do not have) (e.g. Kulkarni et al.
2015) or using regularization to encourage an implicit
disentangled representation (e.g. Higgins et al. 2017).
We adopt an approach similar to that of spatial-VAE
(Bepler et al. 2019) where we generate a disentangled
representation by explicitly including known symmetries
in our generative model.
Our generative model first uses a neural network to
predict the intrinsic spectra of a given transient as a
function of three intrinsic latent variables. The intrinsic spectra are then passed through a physics layer that
explicitly models how the light propagates through the
universe and is observed. The physics layer also takes as
input a set of explicit latent variables and metadata describing the observing conditions. A schematic overview
of our model is shown in Figure 1.

3.2. Variational Autoencoders
To build this model, we developed a modified version
of a VAE (Kingma & Welling 2014). As traditionally
formulated, a VAE is used to model some observed random variables y in terms of some unobserved random
variables s. We assume that s are drawn from some
prior distribution pθ (s), and that y are then drawn from
the conditional distribution pθ (y|s). These distributions
are assumed to be part of some family of distributions
parameterized by the hyperparameters θ.
The posterior distribution pθ (s|y) is in general intractable. Instead of modeling it directly, in a VAE we
instead assume that the posterior can be parameterized
using some family of distributions qφ (s|y) with hyperparameters φ. As shown in Kingma & Welling (2014),
the marginal likelihood of a given observation y is then

bounded by:
log pθ (y) ≥ Eqφ (s|y) [log pθ (y|s)]
− DKL (qφ (s|y)||pθ (s))

(1)

The right side of this equation is referred to as the
“evidence lower bound” or ELBO. The first term of
the ELBO captures the likelihood of the data under
our model, and can be interpreted as the reconstruction error of the model. The second term represents the
Kullback-Leibler divergence (Kullback & Leibler 1951)
between the approximate posterior qφ (s|y) and the prior
pθ (s), and is effectively a constraint on the form of the
approximate posterior.
Typically, an isotropic multivariate Gaussian is assumed for the prior over the latent representation s:
pθ (s) = N (0, I)

(2)

and pθ (y|s) is assumed to be described by a Gaussian
distribution with a diagonal covariance matrix whose
mean is given by some deterministic function dθ (s):
pθ (y|s) = N (dθ (s), σy2 I)

(3)

Finally, we assume that qφ (s|y) is described by a
Gaussian distribution with a diagonal covariance matrix:
qφ (s|y) = N (µφ (y), σφ (y)2 I)

(4)

where µφ (y) and σφ (y) are some deterministic functions
of y. The validity of this assumption will be discussed
in Section 6.5.
Training a VAE then consists of finding appropriate
functions for dθ (s), µφ (y), and σφ (y) that maximize
the ELBO in Equation 1. These functions are typically
implemented as neural networks. A VAE has an architecture that resembles a classical autoencoder. The
function µφ (y) is analogous to the encoder that takes a
set of observations y and outputs a location in the latent
representation s. dθ (s) can be interpreted as a decoder
that generates a forward model of the observations from
the latent representation. The full decoder model of the
VAE given by
pθ (y, s) = pθ (y|s)pθ (s)

(5)

is a generative model.
3.3. Incorporating Symmetries into Variational
Autoencoders
In this work we modify the standard VAE architecture to explicitly incorporate symmetries into our model.

5

ParSNIP: Generative Models of Transient Light Curves
Generative Model dӨ
Metadata m
(z, B, t)
Explicit Latent
Variables se
(t0, A, c)
Output: Light Curve

Intrinsic Spectra

Input: Light Curve

Encoder

Intrinsic Latent
Variables si
(s1, s2, s3)

Intrinsic
Decoder
dint,Ө

Physics
Layer

Comparison

Figure 1. Schematic overview of the ParSNIP model. An encoder model predicts the posterior distribution over a set of
latent variables for a given input light curve. We label a subset of these latent variables as intrinsic latent variables, and use
them as input to an intrinsic decoder model that predicts the full intrinsic time-varying spectrum of the transient. A physics
layer then describes how light propagates through the universe and is observed on a detector. The physics layer takes as input
a set of explicit latent variables and metadata describing the observing conditions. The encoder and intrinsic decoder are
implemented as neural networks. The physics layer uses only physical relations with known functional forms and it has no free
model parameters.

Note that the functions dθ (s), µφ (y), and σφ (y) are
arbitrary functions. Rather than implementing these
purely as neural networks, we instead use a hybrid implementation where we explicitly model symmetries of
the observations where the functional form is known,
and where we use neural networks for parts of the model
whose functional forms are a priori unknown.
Formally, we identify the subset of latent variables
that represent known symmetries of the model as “explicit latent variables”, and we label them se . We call
the remaining latent variables that represent diversity
whose functional form is unknown “intrinsic latent variables”, and we label them si . Then s = {se , si }. We
also allow for additional metadata of the observations
m that describe known observing conditions (e.g. the
time that an observation was taken at). With these definitions, we model the decoder as
dθ (si , se , m) = f1 (se , m, dint,θ (f2 (se , si , m)))

(6)

where dint,θ is an arbitrary function that models the
intrinsic diversity. f1 and f2 are fixed functions that
apply known symmetries to the inputs and outputs of
dint,θ .
To model transient light curves, we choose to use explicit functional forms for the amplitude of the light
curve A, the color (capturing dust reddening of the light
curve) c, and a reference time for the light curve t0 .
Each observation also has associated metadata for the
redshift of the light curve z, the time of the observation
t, and the bandpass that was used for the observation
B(λ). In our formalism, we have se = {A, c, t0 } and

m = {z, t, B(λ)}. We incorporate the known effects
of each of these terms on astronomical observations into
the f1 and f2 functions to produce the following decoder
dθ (si , A, c, t0 , z, t, B(λ))
Z
= dλ · A · B(λ) · C(c,

(7)
λ
) · dint,θ
1+z



λ
t − t0
,
, si
1+z 1+z

where C(c, λ) is a fixed dust extinction law that is applied in the rest frame, and B(λ) are the bandpasses
used for each observation with known throughput. We
choose to use the color law C(c, λ) from Fitzpatrick
& Massa (2007) in this work with RV = 3.1 as implemented in the extinction package (Barbary 2016).
dint,θ is then effectively modeling the time-evolution of
the rest frame spectrum of the transient.
The SALT2 model that is often used to fit SNe Ia (Guy
et al. 2007) is actually a special case of the general model
described in Equation 7 with the a single intrinsic latent
parameter x1 describing the width of the light curve, i.e.
si = {x1 }. For SALT2, the intrinsic diversity is modeled
by a linear sum of two spline template functions M0 (λ, t)
and M1 (λ, t):
dint,SALT2 (t, λ, x1 ) = M0 (λ, t) + x1 M1 (λ, t)

(8)

The SALT2 model provides a good description of most
SNe Ia, but its model of intrinsic diversity is linear which
is insufficient for some SNe Ia (Boone et al. 2021a,b) and
most other kinds of transients.
3.4. Modeling Spectra with a Neural Network



6

Boone

In order to model a wide range of transients, we choose
to implement dint,θ as a multilayer perceptron (MLP).
This function takes as input both the time of an observation and the intrinsic latent variables si . A large part
of the spectrum is typically needed to compute bandpass
photometry, so for computational reasons we choose to
predict the full restframe spectrum with the MLP on
a grid of wavelength elements rather than having the
wavelength as an additional input. Synthetic photometry can then be computed by numerically evaluating
the integral in Equation 7. Labeling the index of each
restframe wavelength bin as n, our implementation of
the decoder can then be written as
dθ (si , A, c, t0 , z, t, B(λ))


X
t − t0
0
0
=
A · Bn · C(c, λn ) · dint,θ,n
, si
1+z
n

(9)

Here λ0n is the central rest-frame wavelength for bin n.
Bn0 are the integrated bandpasses for bin n which can
be computed by integrating the bandpasses over each
wavelength bin
Z λ0n,max
Bn0 =
dλ · B((1 + z)λ)
(10)
λ0n,min

We choose to use a grid of 300 spectral elements
with rest frame wavelengths that are logarithmicallyspaced between 1,000 and 11,000 Å. Logarithmicallyspaced wavelength elements simplify computing the integrated bandpasses Bn0 because redshifting the bandpass is equivalent to a translation of the wavelength elements. We precompute the integrated bandpasses Bn0
by numerically evaluating the integral in Equation 10
with 51 times oversampling. With this configuration,
we find that the numerical uncertainties in our synthetic
photometry are ∼0.0002 mag which is much smaller
than typical measurement uncertainties.
To summarize, we implement dint,θ as an MLP that
takes as inputs the intrinsic latent variables si and a
time. The output of this MLP is a restframe spectrum
on a grid of 300 spectral elements. We then use an explicit physics model of host-galaxy dust, redshift, and
the bandpasses of the telescope to calculate synthetic
photometry from the predicted spectrum and compare
with observations. The MLP has several hyperparameters, namely the number of layers, width of each layer,
and activation function. The values of these hyperparameters will be discussed in Section 3.11.
With this architecture, the full decoder model dθ naturally handles all of the previously-described symmetries
of how the transient was observed. We can evaluate the
full model in different bandpasses or at different redshifts without making any changes to the intrinsic model

or to the intrinsic latent variables si . This is a major difference from previous autoencoder models that predict
the light curve in specific bands directly, and that therefore have a representation where the intrinsic properties
are entangled with properties of how the observations
were taken (e.g. Pasquet et al. 2019; Villar et al. 2020).
3.5. Symmetry-Aware Encoders
We choose to model the posterior distribution of the
latent variables for a given light curve as a Gaussian distribution with a diagonal covariance matrix, as shown
in Equation 4. We assume a N (0, I) prior for the intrinsic latent variables. For the color c, we assume a weak
prior of N (0, 0.32 ) which is much larger than the true
dust distribution. Similarly, we assume a weak prior of
N (0, (20 days)2 ) for the reference time t0 which should
be much wider than the uncertainty from the estimated
times of maximum light from the preprocessing step in
Section 2.1. As will be discussed in Section 3.7, we
marginalize over the amplitude and evaluate its posterior directly so it is ultimately not predicted by our
encoder.
We implement the encoder using residual blocks with
convolutional layers (He et al. 2016). Each block has two
convolutional layers with a kernel size of 3, and we use
ReLU activation functions. A schematic of each block
is shown in Figure 2. We chain a series of seven these
blocks together with increasing dilation sizes so that after all seven blocks the receptive field of the network contains the full light curve. In a traditional VAE, the posteriors of the latent variables would be predicted using
fully connected layers. While such a network should be
theoretically capable of representing the encoding functions for our model, in practice, we find that these networks are very unstable and difficult to train. To address
this challenge, we add custom layers that are aware of
the symmetries in our data to predict the explicit latent
variables.
3.6. A Time-Invariant Encoder
The main challenge for convergence is computing the
reference time t0 for a light curve. At the start of training, the decoder will not be producing functions that
look light light curves, so the gradient of the loss function with respect to t0 will not be meaningful and the
training will progress very slowly if at all. We address
this by constructing a novel neural network architecture
that is mathematically invariant to time translation.
The encoder predicts the hyperparameters µ and σ 2
describing the posterior distributions over the latent
variables in our model. To predict the mean reference
time µt0 , we require our encoder to be a time-equivariant

ParSNIP: Generative Models of Transient Light Curves
Input:
N channels x T times

Conv1D(3, C, D)

ReLU

Pad

Conv1D(3, C, D)

ReLU

Output:
C channels x T times

Figure 2. Architecture of the residual blocks used for the
encoder of our model. Each block takes as input a 2D array
consisting of N channels at T times. Two one-dimensional
convolutional layers are applied along the time dimension
with a kernel size of 3 and a dilation of D elements. The
input is then padded with zeros in the channel dimension
and added with the output of the second convolutional layer
to produce a 2D output with C channels at T times. We
label this block as “ResidualBlock(D, C)”.

function, i.e. a function f (t) that satisfies
f (t + ∆t) = f (t) + ∆t

(11)

For all of the other model hyperparameters, we require
our encoder to be a time-invariant function, i.e. one that
satisfies:
f (t + ∆t) = f (t)

(12)

Convolutional layers on their own are equivariant: if
the input to a convolutional layer is shifted, the output
is identical but shifted by the same amount as the input. By applying a series of the residual blocks shown
in Figure 2 without applying any pooling operations, we
obtain an output that is mathematically equivariant to
any shift in the input light curve by an integer number
of days. The output of this layer is a two-dimensional
array that has a length that is identical to the length
of the input light curve (in our case 300 days) and 200
channels.
To produce a time-invariant function, we throw away
all of the time information by applying a global maxpooling layer to this array. This operation involves taking the maximum value of the array over the time dimension to collapse it in the time dimension and produce a
one-dimensional array with 200 channels. We use fullyconnected layers over the collapsed array to predict all
of the hyperparameters µ and σ 2 describing the posterior distributions over the latent variables in our model
except for the mean reference time µt0 . This procedure

7

is mathematically invariant to any shift in time of the
input light curves by an integer number of days.
To product a time-equivariant function, we begin with
the previously-discussed (300 days) × (200 channels) array that was output from the residual blocks. We use
a fully-connected layer applied to each bin in the time
dimension individually to collapse the channel dimension and obtain a one-dimensional vector v with a single
value for each of the 300 time bins. We then apply a
softmax transformation to this vector to obtain a 300dimensional vector that sums to one. The entries in this
vector can be thought of as weights for whether µt0 appears in a specific bin. We predict the value of µt0 by
taking the dot product of this vector with the index of
each element in the vector (i.e. a vector of increasing
integers from 1 to 300).
µt0 = SoftMax[v] × Index[v]

(13)

Mathematically, if the input light curve is shifted by
some integer number of days, then this function outputs
a value for µt0 that is incremented by the same number
of days as desired. We call this layer a “time-indexing
layer”. By combining the time-indexing layer with the
global max-pooling layer, we produce an encoder that is
mathematically invariant to a translation in the input
of any integer number of days with appropriate transformations for all of the latent variables. Note that we
do not force the reference time to correspond with any
specific feature of the light curve other than having a
weak prior on the time of maximum light. We allow the
model to automatically determine a relevant definition
of reference time on its own.
3.7. Marginalizing Over the Amplitude
With the time-indexing layer the model is able to converge and give reasonable predictions. However, we find
empirically that it is challenging for the model to predict the amplitude A. The amplitude corresponds to an
overall scaling of the model, and is degenerate with a
global scale of all of the outputs. We find that we can
significantly improve the convergence of the model by
modifying the architecture to marginalize over the amplitude rather than have it as an explicit parameter. To
do this, note that given all of the other latent parameters
s0 , we can analytically evaluate the conditional posterior
distribution of A as:
p(A|s0 , y) =

p(y|s0 , A)p(A|s0 )
p(y|s0 )

(14)

Here p(y|s0 ) is a constant that does not depend on
A. Assuming a Jeffreys (flat) prior for p(A|s0 ), this be-

8

Boone

comes:
p(A|s0 , y) ∝ p(y|s0 , A)
(15)


0
2
Y
(y − A · dθ (s , A = 1))
(16)
∝
exp −
2σy2


1
(A − µA )2
=p
exp −
(17)
2
2
2σA
2πσA
where:
2
σA
=P

1

dθ (s0 , A = 1)2 /σy2
P
y · dθ (s0 , A = 1)/σy2
µA = P
dθ (s0 , A = 1)2 /σy2

(18)
(19)

We can then evaluate the log-likelihood log pθ (y|s0 )
necessary for the VAE loss function in Equation 1 as:
Z
0
log pθ (y|s ) = dA · p(y|s0 , A) · p(A|s0 )
(20)
Z
= dA · p(y|s0 , A) + C
(21)
where C is some arbitrary normalization constant that
can be ignored because it will not affect the minimization. We estimate this integral numerically using importance sampling with A drawn from its posterior distribution shown in Equation 17. As is typically done when
training deep learning models, while training we use a
single sample for our numerical estimate of the integral.
With this procedure, we analytically marginalize over
the amplitude A and it is no longer an explicit parameter of our model. The Jeffreys prior that we impose
on p(A|s0 ) is improper, which means that we are not
learning a generative model for the amplitude. This is
not a problem for most science applications as discussed
in Section 6.4, and a similar approach is taken for most
generative models of SNe Ia (e.g. SALT2; Guy et al.
2007). We find that this model that marginalizes over
the amplitude is much easier to train than a model where
the amplitude is an explicit parameter.
3.8. Regularization of the Spectra
As discussed in Section 3.3, we are training our model
to predict the full spectra of transients. We are only
training using photometry in this work, which means
that we are effectively performing a deconvolution. As
a result, the high-frequency components of the spectra
will not be well-constrained. To prevent the model from
adding high-frequency noise to the spectra, we add a
regularization term to our loss function following a procedure similar to the one used by Crenshaw & Connolly
(2020) for estimating galaxy spectra from photometry.

Given the set of wavelength bins with index n, we apply
a penalty on the flux difference between adjacent bins
given by:
η

X  dint,θ,n (t, si ) − dint,θ,n+1 (t, si ) 2
i

dint,θ,n (t, si ) + dint,θ,n+1 (t, si )

(22)

Here η is a tunable parameter that can be adjusted
to determine the strength of the regularization. We apply this penalty to the full spectra that are predicted at
every time where we have an observation. We find empirically that a value of η = 0.001 results in a reasonable
balance between reducing noise and oversmoothing the
spectrum. We find that this regularization term contributes only ∼0.01% to the loss function at the end of
training for both of the datasets that we consider.
3.9. Augmentation
As shown in Boone (2019), augmentation can be used
to generate a wide range of different light curves from
observations of a single transient. When training our
model, we apply a series of different random transformations to our data. These transformations are all applied
independently, and we choose different transformations
in each epoch.
• Shift the observations by a constant offset sampled
from a Normal[0, 20 days] distribution.
• Scale the observations by a constant factor sampled from a Lognormal[0, 0.5] distribution.
• Drop observations randomly, with the fraction to
drop sampled from a Uniform[0, 0.5] distribution.
• With probability 50%, add noise to the observations with a standard deviation sampled from a
Lognormal[-4, 1] distribution.
These transformations produce a wide range of light
curves, with some resembling the original light curves
and others at much lower signal-to-noises with significantly fewer observations. In contrast to Boone (2019),
we do not attempt to augment our light curves in redshift as that cannot be done without making assumptions about the shape of the spectrum. We also do not
attempt to reproduce the observational properties of the
instrument. Instead, we simply attempt to cover a wide
range of signal-to-noises ranging from the original values
to signal-to-noises well-below the detection threshold.
3.10. The ParSNIP model
We combine all of the different elements described
in this Section to build a hybrid physics-VAE model

9

ParSNIP: Generative Models of Transient Light Curves
Input: Gridded fluxes and
uncertainties in each bandpass
and redshift

that can describe transient light curves. We call this
model “ParSNIP” (Parametrization of SuperNova Intrinsic Properties). A schematic of the full ParSNIP
architecture is shown in Figure 3.
We implemented this model in PyTorch (Paszke et al.
2019). We fit the model separately to the PS1 and
PLAsTiCC datasets of transient light curves described
in Section 2 using the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba
2015) with a learning rate of 10−3 and batch sizes of 128.
We use the ReduceLROnPlateau feature in PyTorch to
scale the learning rate by a factor of 0.5 whenever the optimizer fails to reduce the loss function after 10 epochs,
and we train until the learning rate is decreased to below
10−5 . This training procedure takes approximately 300
epochs. The computation times and requirements for
both training and inference are discussed in Section 6.1.

ResidualBlock(1, 40)

ResidualBlock(2, 80)

ResidualBlock(4, 120)

ResidualBlock(8, 160)

ResidualBlock(16, 200)

ResidualBlock(32, 200)

ResidualBlock(64, 200)

3.11. Hyperparameters
Our model has many different hyperparameters that
can be tuned, including the architecture of the network
and the parameters of the optimizer. We trained 56
models on the PS1 dataset using a wide range of different hyperparameter values. We trained on 90% of the
dataset, and kept 10% back for validation. We find that
the model is not highly sensitive to most hyperparameters other than the learning rate, with the loss function
typically varying by < 5%. The results are consistent for
the training and validation sets. When the model performs similarly well on two different configurations, we
choose the one that is more computationally efficient.
We show the range of hyperparameter values that we
considered along with the optimal values from our tests
in Table 1.

Conv1D(1, 200)

Conv1D(1, 200)

Conv1D(1, 200)

Conv1D(1, 1)

MaxPool

TimeIndexing

FC(200)

FC(4)

Encoding Mean

FC(5)

Encoding Logvar

Sample
Observation
Times

Repeat

Concatenate

Conv1D(1, 40)

3.12. Dimensionality of the Intrinsic Latent
Representation
Another important hyperparameter is the dimensionality of the intrinsic latent representation. We trained
the ParSNIP model with varying numbers of intrinsic
dimensions and with all of the other hyperparameters
kept at their optimal values shown in Table 1. For each
model, we evaluated the VAE loss function shown in
Equation 1 on both the training and validation subsets
of the PS1 dataset. The results of this procedure are
shown in Figure 4.
We find that the loss function improves when increasing the dimensionality up to three for both the training and validation sets, but there is little benefit from
adding more dimensions beyond three. For models with
large numbers of dimensions, we find that most of the
dimensions are not used by the VAE, and it simply outputs uninformative N (0, 1) posteriors for all of the tran-

Conv1D(1, 80)

Conv1D(1, 160)

Conv1D(1, 300)
Output: Spectral
time series

Bandpasses

Physics Layer
Output:
Light curve

Figure 3. Architecture of the ParSNIP model.

10

Boone
Table 1. Hyperparameter optimization for the ParSNIP model. We show the range of values
considered for each hyperparameter along with the value that resulted in the model with the smallest
loss function in bold. When arrays are given, each element in the array refers to the hyperparameter
value for a different block in the architecture. The optimal configuration is shown in Figure 3.
Hyperparameter

Value

Batch size
Learning rate
Scheduler factor
Encoder convolutional block types
Encoder convolutional block widths

16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512
10−4 , 2 × 10−4 , 5 × 10−4 , 10−3 , 2 × 10−3 , 5 × 10−3 , 10−2
0.1, 0.2, 0.5
Conv1d, ResidualBlock
[20, 40, 60, 80, 100, 100, 100]
[40, 80, 120, 160, 200, 200, 200]
[32, 64, 128, 128, 128, 128, 128]
[32, 64, 128, 256, 256, 256, 256]
[32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 512, 512]
100, 128, 200, 256, 400, 512
[100]
[50, 100]
[100, 200]
[40, 80, 160]
[64, 128, 256]
[32, 64, 128, 256]

Encoder fully connected block sizes
Decoder architecture

Validation set
Training set

80

VAE loss function

75
70
65
60
1

2

3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Dimensionality of intrinsic latent space

10

Figure 4. VAE loss function for different dimensionalities
of the intrinsic latent representation. For each number of
dimensions we train three models (shown as black dots), and
we shown the mean value of the loss function across all three
models with colored markers. Beyond three dimensions we
see little improvement in the VAE loss function.

sients in some dimensions. We choose to use a threedimensional model for the rest of our experiments.
4. MODEL PERFORMANCE

4.1. Reproducing Light Curves
To study how well our model can reproduce light
curves, we trained the ParSNIP model on 90% of the

light curves in the PS1 dataset described in Section 2
with a randomly selected 10% of the light curves held
out for validation. We show examples of the models for
different light curves in the validation subset in Figure 5.
We find that the ParSNIP model is able to generalize
well on the PS1 dataset with accurate models for the
vast majority of transients.
We calculated the model residuals for all of the observations in our dataset. For the PS1 training set, we
find that the model residuals are consistent with the statistical uncertainties which suggests that may we have
somewhat overfit the training set. For the validation set,
we find that the distribution of the residuals has a tight
core with a dispersion of ∼0.06 mag when statistical uncertainties are taken into account. We do however see
large residuals for some light curves, particularly ones
of transient types that are not well represented in the
training set. For observations with a statistical uncertainty of less that 0.05 mag, we find that 94% of observations have residuals of less than 0.2 mag, and 99.2%
of observations have residuals of less than 0.5 mag.
We performed the same comparison for a version of
the ParSNIP model trained on 90% of the light curves
in the PLAsTiCC dataset. In this case, we find that the
model residuals have a tight core with a dispersion of
∼0.04 mag when statistical uncertainties are taken into
account. For observations with a statistical uncertainty

ParSNIP: Generative Models of Transient Light Curves

PS1-13p (SNIa)
1.2

Normalized Flux

1.0
0.8

PS1-11asz (SNII)

11

PS1-11tt (SLSN)

ParSNIP Model
ps1::g
ps1::i
ps1::r
ps1::z

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2

50
0
50
100
Relative Time (days + 56323.42)

0
50
100
150
Relative Time (days + 55831.57)

150 100 50 0
50 100 150
Relative Time (days + 55714.47)

Figure 5. Examples of out-of-sample predictions of the ParSNIP model on the validation subset of the PS1 dataset. These
light curves were not included in the dataset that was used to train the model. Each panel shows the predictions for a different
light curve. The observations are shown as individual points with their uncertainties, and the different colors correspond to the
different bands as shown in the legend. The mean model predictions are shown as a solid line, and the 1-sigma uncertainties
from varying the VAE latent parameters are shown with shaded contours.

of less than 0.05 mag, we find that 97% of observations
have residuals of less than 0.2 mag and 99.7% of observations have residuals of less than 0.5 mag, with no major
differences between the training and validation sets. The
PLAsTiCC dataset was simulated and the subset that
we used to train the model contains more than 100 times
as many transients as the PS1 dataset which likely explains the difference in training/validation performance
between the PS1 and PLAsTiCC datasets. Overall, we
find that the ParSNIP model is able to produce good
models for the vast majority of the light curves in both
datasets.
4.2. The ParSNIP Intrinsic Latent Space
As described in Section 3.3, the ParSNIP model learns
a three dimensional intrinsic latent space si describing
the intrinsic diversity of transients. To study the structure of the learned latent spaces, we look at where transients with known labels are located in the latent space
for both of our datasets. The results of this procedure
are shown in Figure 6. Most of the different transient
types are well separated despite the fact that the type
labels were not used when training the ParSNIP model.
For transients of the same type, we find that differences in the ParSNIP intrinsic latent variables si correspond to differences in the intrinsic properties of the
transients. This can easily be see using the PLAsTiCC
dataset where all of the parameters that were used for
simulating each light curve are known. In the left panel
of Figure 7, we show that the ParSNIP latent space of
superluminous supernovae is capturing the variation in

ejecta mass that went into the simulations. The SNe II
were simulated using a small number of discrete templates, and we show where light curves simulated from
some of these templates are located in the latent space
in the right panel of Figure 7. The ParSNIP model identifies these discrete templates and clusters light curves
simulated from each of them in the latent space.
As discussed in Section 3, the ParSNIP model was
constructed to produce an intrinsic latent space that
is invariant to how the light curve was observed. As
expected, we find that well-measured light curves simulated with similar parameters are embedded at very
similar locations in the intrinsic latent space even when
those light curves are observed at different redshifts,
with different brightnesses, or with different amounts
of host galaxy dust. There are no major correlations
between any of these properties of the observations and
the intrinsic latent variables si .
To demonstrate the invariance of the ParSNIP model
to redshift, we show the recovered intrinsic latent space
for the PLAsTiCC dataset in different redshift slices in
Figure 8. We find that the recovered latent space is almost identical in all of the different redshift slices. There
are minor differences across redshift bins for some of the
transient types. For example, the SNe II have a much
broader distribution in the lower redshift bins compared
to the higher redshift bins. These differences are due to
Malmquist bias rather than a limitation of the ParSNIP
model. At low redshifts nearly all SNe II are detected,
but at high redshifts only the SNe II that are intrinsically very bright are detected. For the PLAsTiCC

12

Boone

PS1

4

PLAsTiCC

6

3

4

2
2
0

0

s2

s3

1

1

2

2

Unknown
SNIa
SNIbc
SNII
SNIIn
SLSN
FELT

3
4
4

SNIa
SNIax
SNIa-91bg
SNIbc
SNII
SLSN-I

4
6

3

2

1

s1

0

1

2

3

4

6

4

2

0
s1

2

4

KN
TDE
CaRT
ILOT
PISN
6

Figure 6. Visualization of the intrinsic latent spaces learned when trained on the PS1 (left panel) and PLAsTiCC (right
panel) datasets. We show two of the si latent variables for each transient in the dataset, and we color each transient by its
type if known. We limit this plot to show a maximum of 200 transients for each type to highlight rarer types. Despite the
fact that the types were not used when training the ParSNIP model, the model groups transients of the same type at similar
locations in the latent space. Note that these plots show only two dimensions of the intrinsic latent space: each light curve also
has measurements of another si latent variable, color, and amplitude.

PLAsTiCC SLSN

PLAsTiCC SNII

4

6
Ejecta Mass (M )

2

4

0
2

s3

101
s2

Template 201
Template 204
Template 210
Template 216
Template 225
Template 235

8

2
0
2

4

4
5

4

3

2
s1

1

0

1

100

6

4

2

s2

0

2

Figure 7. Examples of diversity of the ParSNIP intrinsic representations for transients of the same type in the PLAsTiCC
dataset. Left panel: The variation of ParSNIP s1 and s2 latent variables for superluminous supernovae is explained by differences
in the ejecta mass parameter (shown in color) that went into the simulations. Right panel: Some of the Type II supernovae
in the PLAsTiCC dataset were simulated using discrete templates. We show the s2 and s3 latent variables for light curves
simulated from six of these templates, and find that the light curves simulated from each template cluster at similar locations
in the ParSNIP intrinsic latent space.

ParSNIP: Generative Models of Transient Light Curves
dataset, this means that at low redshifts the SNe II come
from a wide range of templates giving a wide distribution
in latent space, but at high redshifts the majority of the
observed SNe II come from a single template (number
235) and are clustered tightly in the latent space.
4.3. Comparison with SALT2
The SALT2 model (Guy et al. 2007) is commonly used
to model the light curves of SNe Ia. This model is a
linear model with one parameter x1 describing the variability in the observed widths of SN Ia light curves, and
a second parameter c describing the differences in color
(which will capture host galaxy dust). As described in
Section 3.3, the ParSNIP model is effectively a generalization of the SALT2 model. In this subsection, we
compare the performance of both of these models for
SNe Ia. Note that the PLAsTiCC SN Ia light curves
were simulated using SALT2. For a fair comparison, we
only consider the version of the ParSNIP model that was
trained on real PS1 light curves and is thus independent
of SALT2.
We investigated whether the latent space that the
ParSNIP model learns for SNe Ia captures the x1 and
c parameters of the SALT2 model. To do this, we fit
the SALT2 model to all of the light curves that were
labeled as SNe Ia in the PS1 dataset and compared the
results with the ParSNIP model on the same subset of
light curves. We limited our comparison to light curves
that are well-fit by SALT2, which we define as having
a fit that converges, a best-fit SALT2 x1 parameter between −5 and +5, an uncertainty on x1 of less than 0.5,
an uncertainty on SALT2 c of less than 0.1, and at least
one observation before maximum light.
The ordering of the intrinsic latent variables si in the
ParSNIP model is arbitrary. To effectively compare our
parameterization of the intrinsic diversity to x1 , we solve
for the linear combination of the ParSNIP latent variables si that best models x1 :
X
xParSNIP
= γ0 +
γn si,n
(23)
1
n

We solve for the coefficients γn that minimize the sum
and x1 . Note
of squared differences between xParSNIP
1
that we do not include measurement uncertainties in
this procedure because both the SALT2 and ParSNIP
models were fit to the same observations and the uncertainties on the si and x1 latent variables are likely
very highly correlated. The results of this procedure are
shown in the left panel of Figure 9.
In the right panel of Figure 9, we show the SALT2
c parameter in terms of the ParSNIP c parameter. We
include a constant offset in this comparison given by the

13

difference in the median colors between both datasets to
account for different arbitrary zeropoints. We are able
to accurately predict the SALT2 x1 and c parameters
from the ParSNIP latent space for all of these SNe Ia,
with 88% and 89% of the variance explained respectively. The residuals from the predictions for x1 have an
NMAD of 0.24 and a standard deviation of 0.34. The
differences between the ParSNIP c and SALT2 c values
have an NMAD of 0.037 mag and a standard deviation
of 0.044 mag. The differences between the ParSNIP c
and SALT2 c values are highly correlated with the s3
parameter (ρ=0.64) which simply reflects the fact that
the color zeropoint is arbitrary and can vary across the
parameter space. Our prediction of SALT c could be further improved if this were taken into account. To summarize, given the location of an SN Ia in the ParSNIP
latent space we are able to accurately predict its SALT2
parameters. This implies that the ParSNIP latent space
contains all of the information that is captured by the
SALT2 parameterization of SNe Ia.
We compared how well the SALT2 and ParSNIP models are able to reproduce light curves. An example of the
light curve fits of both models to PS1-11bk is shown in
the top panel of Figure 10. The quality of the light curve
fits are comparable. For the training set (validation set),
we find a median reduced χ2 of 1.42 (1.68) for ParSNIP
fits to SNe Ia and 1.40 (1.21) for SALT2 fits. Note that
for SALT2 we found the exact maximum likelihood values of the model parameters by fitting the model to the
light curves. For the ParSNIP model, we instead used
the encoder to approximate the maximum-a-posteriori
values of the model parameters. All of the ParSNIP
reduced χ2 values would decrease if a full fit were performed to find the true maximum likelihood values of
the model parameters. Nevertheless, we find that the
ParSNIP model is achieving comparable reconstruction
performance to the SALT2 model despite being trained
on a much lower quality dataset.
Both SALT2 and ParSNIP predict the full spectral
time series of the light curves that they fit. We compare
the predicted spectra for PS1-11bk at a range of different times in the lower panel of Figure 10. The SALT2
model was trained using spectra of a large number of
SNe Ia and is known to provide a good description of
the spectra of SNe Ia. In contrast, the ParSNIP model
was trained using only photometric observations. Nevertheless, the ParSNIP model accurately reproduces all
of the major spectral features of SNe Ia as seen in the
SALT2 model. The ParSNIP model does have some nonphysical behavior at UV and IR wavelengths (as does
SALT2) where the PS1 bandpasses have limited coverage. This could be improved by including additional fol-

14

Boone
0 < z < 0.25

6

0.25 < z < 0.5

0.5 < z < 1

1<z<2
SNIa
SNIax
SNIa-91bg
SNIbc
SNII
SLSN-I
KN
TDE
CaRT
ILOT
PISN

4

s2

2
0
2
4
6

6

4

2

0
s1

2

4

6

6

4

2

0
s1

2

4

6

6

4

2

0
s1

2

4

6

6

4

2

0
s1

2

4

6

Figure 8. Visualization of the intrinsic latent space learned for the PLAsTiCC dataset in different redshift ranges. The
redshift range of each panel is shown above the panel. In each panel, we show the s1 and s2 latent variables for 200 transients of
each type, and we color each point by its type. The ParSNIP model was constructed to produce an intrinsic latent space that is
invariant to observing conditions such as redshift, and we find that the latent spaces are nearly identical in each of the different
redshift slices. The slight differences such as the narrowing of the SNe II distribution at high redshifts are due to Malmquist bias
rather than a limitation of the ParSNIP model. Note that some transient types have a limited redshift range in the PLAsTiCC
simulations so they do not appear in some of the redshift slices.

3

0.8

2

0.6
0.4
SALT2 c

SALT2 x1

1
0
1

0.2

2

0.0

3

0.2

4

3

2
1
0
1
2
0.49 0.41 s1 0.14 s2 + 1.54 s3

3

0.2

0.0

0.2
0.4
ParSNIP c + 0.079

0.6

0.8

Figure 9. Reproducing the SALT2 model parameters from the ParSNIP latent space. Left panel: SALT2 x1 as a function
of the best-fit linear combination of the ParSNIP intrinsic latent variables si . Right panel: SALT2 color as a function of the
ParSNIP color with a constant offset. The one-to-one line is shown in blue in both plots. We are able to recover both SALT2
x1 and c from the ParSNIP latent space with high accuracy.

lowup observations in the training. We discuss this further in Section 6.7. We stress that the ParSNIP model
was able to learn the spectrum of an SN Ia by effectively deconvolving photometric observations of SNe Ia
at a wide range of different redshifts, and no spectra
were included in the training dataset.
4.4. Models of Other Kinds of Transients
While empirical models such as SALT2 have been previously developed for SNe Ia, models of other kinds
of transients are typically much more primitive due to
the lack of spectroscopic observations and more com-

plex variability. Our techniques produce a generative
model for the spectral time series of all of these transients. To evaluate the performance of these models, we
compare the spectral time series predicted by ParSNIP
to observed spectra for two different core-collapse supernovae: PS1-12cht, a Type IIn supernova and PS1-12baa,
a peculiar Type Ic supernova. We retrieved spectra for
these two supernovae from the Open Supernova Catalog (Guillochon et al. 2017). Both of these supernovae
are from classes that are not well-sampled in the PS1
dataset, so we show results from a run where these su-

ParSNIP: Generative Models of Transient Light Curves
ParSNIP Model
SALT2 Model
ps1::g
ps1::i
ps1::r
ps1::z

800

Flux (ZPAB=25)

600
400
200
0
75
6

50

25 0
25
50
75
Relative Time (days + 55585.05)

100

125

ParSNIP Model
SALT2 Model

Normalized Flux + Offset

5
4
3
2
1

+0.0 days
+10.0 days
+20.0 days
+30.0 days

0
2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000
Wavelength (Å)
Figure 10. Comparison of the SALT2 and ParSNIP models
for the SN Ia PS1-11bk. Top panel: Comparison of the light
curves. The ParSNIP model is shown with solid lines, and
the SALT2 model is shown with a dashed line. Bottom panel:
Comparison of the spectra predicted by both models at a
range of different times. We find good agreement between
the SALT2 and ParSNIP models other than in the UV and
IR regions that are not covered by many observations.

pernovae were included in the training of the ParSNIP
model.
In the left panel of Figure 11, we show the light curve
and spectra of PS1-12cht, a Type IIn supernova. These
spectra were obtained by the PESSTO collaboration
(Smartt et al. 2015) and are relatively featureless. We
find that the ParSNIP model produces good predictions
of the overall shape of the spectra and the photometry,
although we do see some ringing of the spectra at bluer
wavelengths.
In the right panel of Figure 11, we show the light curve
and spectra of PS1-12baa, a peculiar Type Ic supernova.
These spectra were obtained by the LOSS collaboration
(Shivvers et al. 2019). The spectra of this supernova
show many different emission lines, especially at later
times. The ParSNIP model predictions agree well with
the observed spectra at early times and reproduce most

15

of the observed spectral features. At later times, we
find that the ParSNIP model is able to predict the broad
structure of the spectrum, but it struggles to predict the
exact locations and widths of all of the emission lines.
This is not surprising: the ParSNIP model was only
trained on photometry, so the estimates of the spectra
come from effectively deconvolving the photometry of
many transients at different redshifts. PS1-12baa is a
peculiar Type Ic supernova, and there are very few examples of similar supernovae in the PS1 dataset. The
deconvolved spectra are therefore not very well constrained. This could be addressed by training on a larger
dataset, such as the one that the Rubin Observatory will
produce, or by including spectra or additional followup
observations in the training process. These options are
discussed in Section 6.7.
4.5. Comparison with Simulations
The PLAsTiCC dataset was simulated, so we can compare the spectra predicted by the ParSNIP model directly to those that were used in the simulation. The
result of this procedure is shown for well-measured light
curves of a range of different types of transients in Figure 12. Some classes, such as Type II supernovae, were
simulated using several different models with very different spectral properties. We find that the ParSNIP model
is able to identify the different models and recover the
underlying spectral time series for each of them.
The spectra that are recovered by the ParSNIP model
tend to be overly smooth compared to the input simulations. This is primarily due to the fact that we are
learning the spectra by deconvolving photometry. The
regularization term described in Section 3.8 can be adjusted to recover more of the spectral features, but this
comes at the cost of introducing additional noise into
the model. In practice, we find that they choice of regularization term has little impact on the final photometry
because all of the high frequency information is lost after
the convolution with the bandpass.
5. APPLICATIONS

There are many different applications for a generative
model of all transient light curves. We discuss three
of them in this section. In Section 5.1, we show how
the ParSNIP model can be used to perform photometric
classification even with heavily biased training sets. In
Section 5.4, we demonstrate a novel method of searching
for new kinds of transients. In Section 5.5, we show how
the ParSNIP model can be used to estimate cosmological
distances to SNe Ia.
5.1. Photometric Classification

16

Boone

PS1-12cht (SNIIn)

PS1-12baa (SNIbc)

1.2
1.0
Normalized Flux

0.8
0.6
0.4

0.8
0.6
0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.2

100

50
0
50
100
Relative Time (days + 56277.50)

150

50

ParSNIP Model
Observed Spectra

7

ParSNIP Model
ps1::g
ps1::i
ps1::r
ps1::z

1.0
Normalized Flux

ParSNIP Model
ps1::g
ps1::i
ps1::r
ps1::z

7

6

0

50
100
150
Relative Time (days + 56147.91)

200

ParSNIP Model
Observed Spectra
3.5 days

6
14.5 days
5
2.5 days

4
4.5 days
3
26.5 days
2

Normalized Flux + Offset

Normalized Flux + Offset

5

29.3 days
4
47.3 days
3
58.4 days
2

34.5 days
1

69.1 days
1

45.5 days
0

97.3 days
0

2000

3000

4000 5000 6000 7000
Rest-Frame Wavelength (Å)

8000

9000

3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000 11000
Rest-Frame Wavelength (Å)

Figure 11. Comparison of the ParSNIP model to observed spectra of core-collapse supernovae. The left two panels show
the model and data for PS1-12cht, a Type IIn supernova, and the right two panels show the model and data for PS1-12baa,
a peculiar Type Ic supernova. The top two panels show the observed PS1 photometry and the ParSNIP model fit to that
photometry. The bottom two panels show observed spectra for each of these supernovae from PESSTO (Smartt et al. 2015)
and LOSS (Shivvers et al. 2019) respectively along with spectra from the ParSNIP model evaluated at the same phases. We
normalize all of the spectra to the flux at 6000Å. We find that the broad structure of the ParSNIP predicted spectra agree well
with the observed spectra despite the fact that the ParSNIP model was only trained using photometry.

Upcoming surveys such as the LSST with the Rubin
Observatory will obtain photometric observations of millions of transients, but will only have the spectroscopic
resources to obtain spectroscopy of and label a small
fraction of these transients. Traditional classification
techniques only use this small dataset of labeled transients for training (e.g. Lochner et al. (2016); Boone
(2019)). In contrast, autoencoder-based methods can
learn a low-dimensional representation from the much
larger dataset of both labeled and unlabeled transients.

This representation is a set of very informative features
which can be used to train a photometric classifier on
the small labeled dataset. This approach has previously
been demonstrated in Pasquet et al. (2019) and Villar
et al. (2020).
The main advantage of ParSNIP over previous autoencoders is that the representation that it learns was constructed to disentangle intrinsic properties of transients
from properties describing how transients were observed.
In particular, the intrinsic representation is disentangled

17

ParSNIP: Generative Models of Transient Light Curves

SNII - Template

SNII - NMF

SNII - MOSFIT
ParSNIP Model
Simulated Model

Normalized Flux + Offset

5
4
3
2
1

+0.0 days

+0.0 days

+10.0 days

+10.0 days

+20.0 days

+20.0 days

+30.0 days

+30.0 days

+0.0 days
+10.0 days
+20.0 days
+30.0 days

0

SLSN-I - MOSFIT

Normalized Flux + Offset

5
4

SNIbc - Template
+0.0 days

+0.0 days

+10.0 days

+10.0 days

+20.0 days

+20.0 days

+20.0 days

+30.0 days

+30.0 days

+30.0 days

+0.0 days

3

+10.0 days

2
1

SNIbc - MOSFIT

0
2000

4000 6000 8000 10000
Wavelength (Å)

2000

4000 6000 8000 10000
Wavelength (Å)

2000

4000 6000 8000 10000
Wavelength (Å)

Figure 12. Comparison of the spectra predicted by the ParSNIP model to the true spectra in the PLAsTiCC simulations.
Each panel shows the simulated spectra for a given transient in grey at a range of different times. The spectra predicted by
the ParSNIP model for that transient are shown in green. The titles of each panel indicate the type of transient and model
that was used for the simulation. We find that the ParSNIP model is able to accurately recover the spectral time series of all
of these different kinds of transients despite only being trained on photometry.

from redshift. The labeled training sets tend to be heavily biased towards low-redshift transients, so redshift is
not a good feature to use for classification. Pasquet et al.
(2019) attempted to construct a similar representation
using a contrastive loss function that adds a penalty
when transients with the same label have very different
representations. This technique is effective, but requires
a representative sample of labeled high redshift transients that is often not available. In contrast, ParSNIP
can generate such a representation with only the unlabeled dataset because it is a full generative model.
To perform photometric classification with ParSNIP,
we first augment each light curve in the training set 100
times following the procedure in Section 3.9. Note that
we do not perform redshift augmentation as in Boone
(2019), we only use augmentation to obtain light curves
at a wide range of signal-to-noises and observing conditions. We then perform inference using the ParSNIP
model to estimate the latent representations for all of
the transients in the augmented training set. We convert the amplitude measured by the ParSNIP model to
a pseudo-luminosity L using the cosmological parame-

ters from Planck Collaboration et al. (2020) with the
following formula:
L = −2.5 log10 (A) − µPlanck20 (z) + 25

(24)

The offset of 25 comes from the fact that the input
fluxes for both the ParSNIP and PLAsTiCC datsets
were measured on the AB system with a zeropoint of
25. We refer to L as a pseudo-luminosity because it contains an arbitrary offset from the unknown zeropoint of
the ParSNIP model. This offset will be identical for all
light curves with the same intrinsic representation. We
use the full ParSNIP representation as the features for
our classifier, consisting of the intrinsic latent variables
s1 , s2 , s3 , the pseudo-luminosity L, and the color c. We
also include the predicted uncertainties on all of these
measurements and the uncertainty on the reference time
for a total of eleven features. We do not include redshift
as an explicit feature as the redshift distributions of the
labeled and unlabeled datasets tend to be very different,
although the redshift is used to calculate the luminosity.
We train a gradient boosted decision tree on these
features using the lightgbm package (Ke et al. 2017).
When training this classifier, we weight each transient

5.2. Photometric Classification on the PS1 Dataset
For the PS1 dataset, we only have labels for a subset
of 557 transients. We predict the labels for each of these
transients using 10-fold cross-validation. In Figure 13,
we show a confusion matrix for this dataset. Each row
of the confusion matrix shows what fraction of the transients of a given type are assigned to each label by the
classifier. We find that the ParSNIP model is able to
accurately classify all of the different types of transients
in this dataset, with 63% to 92% of the transients of
each type being correctly identified in a five-way classification.
Our results are a significant improvement from both
the SuperRAENN (Villar et al. 2020) and Superphot
(Hosseinzadeh et al. 2020) models that have previously
been applied to this dataset. We achieve an overall
accuracy of 89% for the five-way classification compared to 87% for SuperRAENN on the same dataset.
For the metric of the“macro-average completeness” defined in Villar et al. (2020) (the mean of the diagonal
terms in the confusion matrix), we achieve a value of
79% with ParSNIP compared to 69% for both SuperRAENN and Superphot. For a two-way classification
of SNe Ia compared to all other labels, we achieve a
macro-averaged completeness of 96% compared to 92%
for SuperRAENN. This implies that a sample of SNe Ia
that was photometrically classified with ParSNIP would
have ∼2 times less contamination than a sample classified with SuperRAENN.
These predictions were all made through crossvalidation, so the classifiers were evaluated on datasets
that have very similar properties to the datasets that
they were trained on. The major advantage of ParSNIP
over previous models is that its representation is invariant to symmetries such as redshift, and it is designed

SLSN

0.82

0.00

0.12

0.00

0.06

SNII

0.00

0.84

0.08

0.01

0.08

SNIIn

0.17

0.17

0.67

0.00

0.00

SNIa

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.93

0.06

SNIbc

0.00

0.21

0.00

0.11

0.68

1.0
0.8
Fraction of objects

PS1 ParSNIP

0.6
0.4
0.2

Predicted Type

bc
SNI

a
SNI

SNI
In

SNI

I

0.0

SLS
N

in the training set so that the sum of weights for each
label is equal and so that the average weight across all
transients is one. We use the default hyperparameter
values from lightgbm with a multi logloss objective
function, except that we set the min child weight parameter to 1000 to avoid overfitting the augmented light
curves. We train the classifiers with 10-fold cross validation: we train each classifier on 90% of the data and
evaluate the model on the remaining 10%. We repeat
this procedure ten times to obtain ten separate classifiers
and out-of-sample predictions for all of the transients in
the training set. To avoid data leakage, we ensure that
all augmentations of the same light curve are in the same
fold for this procedure. For the unlabeled dataset, we
generate predictions by averaging over the outputs of all
of the classifiers.

Boone

True Type

18

Figure 13.
Confusion matrix for the cross-validated
ParSNIP predictions on the PS1 dataset. Each entry shows
the fraction of transients of the type labeled on the left side
of the plot that are assigned the corresponding type labeled
on the bottom of the plot.

to perform well even when the training set differs significantly from the dataset that the classifier is applied
to. We expect that the improvement in performance of
ParSNIP over previous models such as SuperRAENN
or Superphot will be even larger when applied to the
non-representative datasets such as the ones that will
be produced by the Rubin Observatory or the Rubin
Space Telescope. Unfortunately it is impossible to test
this performance on real data since we do not have access to the true labels for the higher redshift transients,
although we can test it on simulations.
5.3. Photometric Classification on the PLAsTiCC
Dataset
The PLAsTiCC dataset is a simulation of the LSST
light curve sample, and has a labeled training set that
is highly nonrepresentative of the full dataset. We compare the performance of the ParSNIP model for classification of the PLAsTiCC light curves to the performance
of the Avocado model (Boone 2019) that was the best
performing classifer in the PLAsTiCC challenge (Hložek
et al. 2020). In the version of ParSNIP discussed in
this work, we assume that we know the redshift of each
transient but this information was not available in the
original PLAsTiCC dataset. For a fair comparison, we
retrained the Avocado classifier using the true redshifts
instead of photometric redshifts. We show the confusion
matrices for both the ParSNIP and Avocado classifiers
in Figure 14.
The ParSNIP model achieves similar or better performance than Avocado for each of the different kinds
of transients. We evaluated the weighted log-loss metric developed for the PLAsTiCC challenge (Malz et al.

19

ParSNIP: Generative Models of Transient Light Curves

0.0

Fraction of objects

SNIbc 0.02 0.00 0.08 0.06 0.14 0.10 0.59 0.01

0.2

TDE 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.93

TDE

SNI
I
SNI
a
SNI
a-91
bg
SNI
ax
SNI
bc

N-I
SLS

KN

TDE 0.00 0.01 0.03 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.93

0.2

0.4

SNIax 0.01 0.00 0.08 0.23 0.09 0.47 0.11 0.02

Predicted Type

0.0

TDE

SNIbc 0.03 0.00 0.11 0.02 0.12 0.10 0.59 0.02

SNIa-91bg 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.03 0.82 0.04 0.09 0.00

SNI
I
SNI
a
SNI
a-91
bg
SNI
ax
SNI
bc

SNIax 0.02 0.00 0.08 0.11 0.10 0.56 0.10 0.02

0.4

0.6

SNIa 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.89 0.04 0.02 0.02 0.01

N-I

SNIa-91bg 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.02 0.87 0.04 0.05 0.00

0.6

0.8

SNII 0.00 0.00 0.67 0.10 0.03 0.09 0.07 0.04

SLS

SNIa 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.88 0.02 0.04 0.01 0.02

SLSN-I 0.00 0.96 0.02 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01

0.8

KN

True Type

SNII 0.01 0.00 0.72 0.04 0.01 0.05 0.04 0.14

1.0

KN 0.94 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.05 0.00

True Type

SLSN-I 0.00 0.97 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01

PLAsTiCC Avocado

1.0

Fraction of objects

PLAsTiCC ParSNIP
KN 0.98 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00

Predicted Type

Figure 14. Confusion matrices for the ParSNIP (left panel) and Avocado (right panel) predictions on the PLAsTiCC test set.
Each entry shows the fraction of transients of the type labeled on the left side of the plot that are assigned the corresponding
type labeled on the bottom of the plot. We find that the ParSNIP model has similar or better performance than the Avocado
model for every kind of transient.

1.0
0.8
True positive rate

2019) limited to the subset of transient types used in
this analysis. Avocado scores 0.599 on this metric while
ParSNIP scores 0.535 which is a major improvement. To
illustrate how this difference in performance will affect
astrophysical analyses, we evaluated the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve for both of these classifiers for SNe Ia. This curve measures the true positive
rate (the fraction of SNe Ia that are correctly classified
as SNe Ia) as a function of the false positive rate (the
fraction of non-SNe Ia that are misclassified as SNe Ia)
for different thresholds of the classifier output. We show
the ROC curve for both the ParSNIP and Avocado classifiers in Figure 15.
Measuring the Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC)
(the integral of this curve), we find a value of 0.977 for
the ParSNIP model compared to 0.962 for the Avocado
model. The improvement of the ParSNIP model mainly
comes from a major reduction in the false positive rate
for true positive rates below ∼ 90%. For a true positive rate of 50%, the ParSNIP model has a false positive
rate of only 0.44% which is 2.3 times smaller than the
false positive rate of 1.04% for the Avocado model. We
find similar results for any true positive rate below 0.9.
This is of particular importance for cosmology analyses with SNe Ia where it is more important to have
a clean dataset than include all transients that were
discovered. A SN Ia cosmology analysis that uses the
ParSNIP model for classification will have 2.3 times less
contamination from other supernova types compared to
an analysis that uses the Avocado model.

0.6
0.4
0.2
ParSNIP (AUC = 0.977)
Avocado (AUC = 0.962)

0.0
0.0

0.2

0.4
0.6
False positive rate

0.8

1.0

Figure 15. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve
for SN Ia classification on the PLAsTiCC dataset. The
ParSNIP model (shown in blue) performs significantly better than the Avocado model (shown in orange), especially
for thresholds corresponding to low false positive rates that
are most interesting for supernova cosmology analyses.

Finally, we evaluated the performance of both the
ParSNIP and Avocado models as a function of redshift.
We evaluated the AUC for classification of SNe Ia in 100
evenly-spaced redshift bins between redshifts of 0 and
1.5. The results for both the Avocado and ParSNIP
models are shown in Figure 16. We find that the
ParSNIP model is stable across different redshifts, and
outperforms the Avocado model at all redshifts. Of particular note is the decrease in performance for the Avocado model at very low redshifts where we would expect to have very high signal-to-noise and well-measured

20

Boone
1.00
0.98
0.96
AUC

0.94
0.92
0.90
0.88
0.86
0.84

ParSNIP
Avocado
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6 0.8 1.0
Redshift

1.2

1.4

Figure 16. AUC for classification of SNe Ia as a function
of redshift for both the ParSNIP model (shown in blue) and
Avocado model (shown in orange) on the PLAsTiCC dataset.
The ParSNIP model outperforms the Avocado model at all
redshifts.

light curves. The Avocado model attempts to augment
the training dataset by simulating light curves at redshifts that are more representative of the full dataset,
but struggles to produce good simulations of very low
redshift transients because light curves at those redshifts
are much higher signal-to-noise than most of the light
curves in the training set. Fundamentally, the Avocado
augmentation process must be heavily tuned for each
dataset that it is applied to in order to minimize differences between the training and test sets.
In contrast, the ParSNIP model builds a redshiftindependent representation of light curves from the
full dataset, and is mostly agnostic to differences in
the redshift distributions between the training and full
datasets. Other than definitions of the bandpasses, there
are no instrument-specific elements of the ParSNIP
model. The same ParSNIP model was able to fit both
the PLAsTiCC and PS1 datasets. We find that the
ParSNIP model has good performance at all redshifts
without the need for procedures such as redshift augmentation.
5.4. Detecting Novel Transients
Upcoming surveys such as LSST will produce samples
of transients that are more than two orders of magnitude larger than current samples, and could contain entirely new kinds of “novel” transients that have never
been previously observed. Previous work on detecting novel transients has typically focused on identifying
transients that are in some way different from the bulk
of the sample (Pruzhinskaya et al. 2019; Ishida et al.
2019; Martı́nez-Galarza et al. 2021; Villar et al. 2021)
without considering what was previously known about

transients. As a result, these methods typically produce
a sample of transients that consists mostly of rare transients (e.g. superluminous supernovae) rather than ones
that have truly never been observed.
In this work, we instead explore an alternative approach to anomaly detection enabled by the ParSNIP
model that takes prior knowledge into account. The
ParSNIP model was constructed so that transients with
the same intrinsic properties are embedded at the same
location in the intrinsic latent space regardless of how
they were observed. Assuming that we have known labels for some subset of the transients in a given dataset,
we can identify novel transients by finding unlabeled
transients whose locations in the ParSNIP latent space
are different from those of the transients in the labeled
subset. Note that this approach cannot be used with
most previously-used feature extraction methods because their features are correlated with properties of the
observations such as redshift.
We demonstrate this approach on the PLAsTiCC
dataset. The authors of the PLAsTiCC dataset included
several different kinds of transients in the full PLAsTiCC dataset that were not present in the labeled training set, including pair-instability supernovae (PISN), intermediate luminosity optical transients (ILOT), and
calcium-rich transients (CaRT) (Kessler et al. 2019).
As can be seen in Figure 6, the PISNe and ILOTs are
well-separated from all other kinds of transients in the
ParSNIP latent space. We generate an augmented version of the PLAsTiCC training set with 100 realizations
of each light curve following the procedure described in
Section 3.9 to cover a wide range of different observing conditions. For each transient in the full dataset,
we then calculate the Euclidean distance between the
ParSNIP intrinsic latent variables si of that transient
and the nearest transient in the augmented training
dataset. This distance measure can be interpreted as a
novelty score, where transients with large distances are
very different from all of the transients in the training
set.
Of the top 100 transients ranked by this novelty score,
87 are ILOTs and 3 are PISNe, meaning that 90% of the
transients in this sample of “novel transients” are in fact
a new kind of transient that isn’t present in the labeled
training set. For comparison, Villar et al. (2021) use
an isolation forest on the same dataset. They obtain
a sample of rare transients that is 95% pure according
to their definition, but the vast majority of these rare
transients are superluminous supernovae, examples of
which are available in the training set, and only < 5% of
the transients in their sample come from the types that
are not included in the training dataset. We stress that

ParSNIP: Generative Models of Transient Light Curves
these are two entirely different approaches to anomaly
detection. Which one is more applicable will depend
on the science goals of a given project. However, the
ParSNIP representation enables alternative approaches
to anomaly detection that can take prior knowledge into
account.
The methodology that we demonstrated here is very
simple, and we only considered the intrinsic ParSNIP
representation. More advanced techniques could also
take advantage of luminosity, color, and redshift information or even additional information such as properties
of the host galaxies. They could also look at the density
of transients in each of the training and full datasets.
In practice, the detection of novel transients should involve a feedback loop where resources are dedicated to
followup candidates, and where these are then added
back into the training set. This form of “active learning” is discussed in detail in Ishida et al. (2019) and an
application to isolation forests for anomaly detection is
discussed in Ishida et al. (2021). The ParSNIP model
is ideally suited to being used with these techniques. It
extracts a robust representation of transients in an unsupervised manner, so it can be trained on unlabeled
datasets containing novel transients. Furthermore, the
representation only consists of a small number of parameters, so it is very computationally efficient to use
the ParSNIP representation instead of other feature extraction methods that can produce tens or hundreds of
features.
5.5. Estimating Distances to SNe Ia
One major application of the SALT2 model is estimating distances to transients. As a similar generative
model, the ParSNIP model can also be used for distance estimation. SALT2 and ParSNIP both estimate
the brightnesses of transients relative to some arbitrary
zeropoint that can vary over the latent space. By subtracting off the zeropoint, we obtain a distance estimate.
For SALT2, the zeropoint is typically modelled using a
linear function of the SALT2 x1 and c parameters resulting in the following model for estimating distances
µSALT2 = M + αx1 + βc

(25)

For ParSNIP, we use a similar model with linear corrections for all of the intrinsic latent variables
µParSNIP = M + α1 s1 + α2 s2 + α3 s3 + βc

(26)

We fit for the values of M , αi and β in both of these
models by comparing the estimated distance moduli to
the distance moduli from the corresponding redshifts using the cosmological parameters from Planck Collaboration et al. (2020). In both cases, we use the sample

21

of PS1 SNe Ia with good SALT2 fits described in Section 4.3. We use Chauvenet’s criterion to reject SNe Ia
that are large outliers for either model which removes
8 of the 265 SNe Ia in our sample. For the same set
of SNe Ia, we find that the RMS of the SALT2 distance estimates is 0.155±0.008 mag and the RMS of the
ParSNIP distance estimates is 0.150 ± 0.007 mag. When
looking at only the core of the distribution, we find that
ParSNIP is able to estimate distances with an NMAD
of 0.126 ± 0.009 mag compared to 0.139 ± 0.011 mag
for SALT2. Hence, the ParSNIP model can be used to
estimate accurate distances to SNe Ia, and it performs
slightly better than the SALT2 model for distance estimation on this sample of SNe Ia.
One important caveat is that precision cosmology
analyses require a thorough understanding of light curve
modeling uncertainties to avoid biases. SALT2 includes
an explicit description of the model covariance at every
time/wavelength that can be used to identify regions
of the spectrum where the model is unreliable, such as
the UV/IR as seen in Figure 10. The ParSNIP model
uncertainties for Type Ia supernova light curves should
be thoroughly investigated and understood before using
ParSNIP in precision cosmology analyses.
6. DISCUSSION

6.1. Computational Requirements
All of the training and inference in this work was done
using an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti GPU. Training a new model takes approximately 2 hours for the
PS1 dataset and 23 hours for the PLAsTiCC dataset.
The training time could also be decreased significantly
by adjusting the learning rate scheduler without having a major impact on model performance. Inference
takes approximately 11 seconds for the PS1 dataset or
2 hours for the full PLAsTiCC dataset of over 3 million light curves. The model can also be trained and
evaluated on a CPU. When running on 8 cores of an
AMD Ryzen Threadripper 3970X, we find that the performance is roughly 6 times slower than the numbers
quoted previously for the GPU.
These computational times are not prohibitive even
for large surveys such as LSST. With a single GPU, the
ParSNIP model could be retrained on a near nightly
basis and used to perform inference on the entire dataset
of LSST light curves. We can perform inference at a rate
of approximately 500 LSST light curves per second with
a single GPU, so inference could easily be performed live
on the LSST alert stream.
6.2. Supernova Cosmology Without Classification

22

Boone

As discussed in Section 5.1, surveys such as LSST
will rely on photometric classification to identify samples of SNe Ia. Previous cosmological analyses with
photometrically-classified SNe Ia have used one model
to identify whether a transient is an SN Ia, and a second model to estimate the distance to that transient
assuming that it is an SN Ia (Hlozek et al. 2012; Jones
et al. 2018). As a result, the distance estimates for any
non SNe Ia that leak into the sample are heavily biased.
The ParSNIP model can be used both for classifying
transients (as discussed in Section 5.1 and estimating
distances (as discussed in Section 5.5), so these two steps
could be done simultaneously in a supernova cosmology
analysis. As part of the cosmology fit, one would fit for
the distance modulus zeropoint across the ParSNIP latent representation as we did for the SN Ia subset in Section 5.5. Fitting distances to all transients will require
a more complex zeropoint model than the simple linear
one that we used for SNe Ia because some transients
have much larger ranges of dispersion in luminosity.
Given such a zeropoint model, distances estimates to
individual transients could be obtained by marginalizing over the latent representation using the posterior distribution from the ParSNIP model. This procedure would effectively marginalize over all of the different kinds of transients that each light curve is compatible with, and would estimate distances to all transients, not just SNe Ia. This procedure would reduce
many of the biases present in current cosmology analyses
with photometrically-classified supernovae because it estimates distances to non-SNe Ia using a model trained on
those transients rather than a model trained on SNe Ia.
We plan on developing such a model in future work.
6.3. Photometric Redshifts
The current implementation of the ParSNIP model relies on spectroscopic redshifts. These redshifts will not
be available for all transients, and this is especially true
when surveys are in progress. In principle, the redshift
could be treated as an additional explicitly-modeled latent variable in the VAE. Upcoming experiments such
as the Rubin Observatory or the Roman Space Telescope will have photometric redshift models for the host
galaxies of most of the transients they observe, and these
could be used as a prior for the VAE. This kind of analysis would rely on understanding the posteriors of the
photometric redshift models and would have to be tuned
to specific experiments.
We also find that the encoder is not very sensitive to
changes in the input redshift. We performed inference
on the PS1 dataset with noise added to all of the input
redshifts with a standard deviation of 0.05 mag. The re-

covered intrinsic representation coordinates change with
an RMS of 0.20, 0.10, and 0.11 for s1 , s2 , and s3 respectively. These differences are negligible for applications such as photometric classification. Photometric
redshifts could therefore likely be used directly as inputs to a pretrained ParSNIP model without a significant degradation in performance.
6.4. Latent Variable Priors
The ParSNIP model learns priors on the intrinsic latent variables, but we assumed fixed weak priors on
the explicitly-modeled latent variables. We made this
assumption because the light curve datasets that the
model was trained on are highly biased. Astronomical surveys have some limiting magnitude beyond which
they will not detect transients, so the populations of observed transients are biased towards brighter, bluer, and
lower-redshift transients. By using a fixed weak prior,
we make no assumptions about these biases and they
can be corrected for in further analyses if necessary.
The explicitly-modeled latent variables tend to be very
well constrained. For the PS1 dataset, the median posterior uncertainty on the reference time is 0.7 days compared to the prior of 20 days, the median uncertainty
on the color is 0.049 compared to the prior of 0.3, and
the median uncertainty on the amplitude is 3%. All of
these variables are well constrained even for low signalto-noise light curves, so the choice of prior has minimal
impact on the posterior distributions. Applications such
as photometric classification or distance estimation only
depend on the posterior distributions, so they will not
be significantly impacted by different choices of the prior
distribution.
Simulating new light curves from the ParSNIP model
is one application that does require knowledge of the
prior distributions of the explicitly-modeled latent variables. These prior distributions could be estimated directly from a large dataset of light curves by explicitly
modeling the selection functions, although this would be
very challenging. Alternatively, the prior distributions
can simply be estimated from theoretical or empirical
models as was done for the PLAsTiCC simulations.
6.5. Latent Variable Posteriors
The decoder of the ParSNIP model is a generative
model with a well-defined likelihood. The encoder model
uses variational inference to approximate the posterior
distribution over the latent variables for a given light
curve, but it is also possible to evaluate this posterior
distribution directly. In particular, optimizers can be
used to find the maximum-a-posteriori values of the latent variables for a given light curve, and techniques

ParSNIP: Generative Models of Transient Light Curves
such as Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) can be used
to sample from the posterior distribution directly. These
approaches are currently used in supernova cosmology
analyses with models such as SALT2, and provide much
more detailed information about the posteriors but tend
to be very computationally intensive. We added an interface for the ParSNIP model to the SNCosmo package
(Barbary et al. 2016) that implements several methods
of fitting light curves and evaluating posteriors.
When training ParSNIP model using variational inference, we assumed that the posterior of the latent variables can be described by a Gaussian distribution with
a diagonal covariance matrix. To test this assumption,
we used the emcee (Foreman-Mackey et al. 2013) implementation of MCMC in SNCosmo to draw a large number
of samples from the posterior distributions of individual
light curves. An example of the sampled posterior distribution for a typical light curve from the PLAsTiCC
dataset is shown in Figure 17.
We find that the posterior distributions over the latent variables other than amplitude are typically welldescribed by a Gaussian distribution with a diagonal covariance matrix, and the predicted means and standard
deviations that we obtain from variational inference are
generally consistent with the true posterior distributions. This statement holds even for light curves that are
only partially sampled, and we do not see any evidence
of multi-modal posterior distributions. The amplitude
and color latent variables are always highly correlated
which justifies our decision to marginalize over the amplitude as described in Section 3.7. In general, we find
that the posteriors estimated by variational inference are
reasonably accurate, but it may be desirable to evaluate the full posteriors for applications such as supernova
cosmology that require very high precision.
6.6. Applying the ParSNIP Model to Other Kinds of
Light Curves
The model described in this paper was designed to be
applied to short-lived transient light curves, and should
not be applied to other kinds of light curves without
modifications. In particular, the preprocessing procedure described in Section 2.1 roughly aligns and scales
all of the light curves assuming that they have a welldefined maximum. This is not a valid assumption for
sources such as variable stars or active galactic nuclei.
We also subtract the background level of each light curve
using observations away from maximum light, and we
constrain the model to only output positive flux values. None of these assumptions are fundamental to the
ParSNIP model, and they should all be adjusted as appropriate if applying the model to other kinds of light

23

curves (e.g. not subtracting the background for variable
stars).
6.7. Including Additional Observations in the Training
In this work we assumed that we only have photometry available for all of the light curves in our sample.
Large spectroscopic followup campaigns are planned for
most upcoming surveys. As an example, the 4MOST
consortium projects that they will obtain 30,000 spectra of live transients (Swann et al. 2019). These spectra could be used to train the ParSNIP model. The
ParSNIP model already predicts the spectra at every
phase when the model is compared to photometry, and
these model spectra could instead be compared to observed spectra directly.
When trained only on photometry, the ParSNIP
model is required to learn spectra by deconvolving the
photometry. Including spectra of even a subset of
the transients would constrain the underlying spectral
model. This would be especially helpful for rare transients, such as PS1-12baa discussed in Section 4.4, where
there is limited photometry of similar transients to constrain the positions and widths of spectral features.
Additional followup photometry in different bands
could similarly be included to constrain the model at
wavelengths where spectral coverage is typically lacking, especially the UV and IR bands. Including a modest amount of IR photometry in the ParSNIP training
dataset would allow ParSNIP to learn a coarse IR spectral model. Such models only currently exist for Type Ia
supernovae, but are essential for simulating and planning upcoming experiments such as the Roman Space
Telescope.
6.8. Combining Light Curves from Multiple Surveys
Transient light curves have been collected by many
different surveys, and the ParSNIP model could be improved by training on a larger sample of light curves
observed by different instruments. The neural network
in the decoder of the ParSNIP model predicts spectra,
and we explicitly compute photometry from those spectra using the known bandpasses for an instrument. As
a result, the ParSNIP decoder can be used to predict
the photometry for any instrument or bandpass without
any modification to the architecture or neural network
weights.
The ParSNIP encoder, on the other hand, treats all
of the individual bandpasses separately. Nevertheless,
it can operate on multiple instruments by adding additional channels to the input representing the individual bandpasses from each instrument. For instrument/bandpass combinations in which a transient was

24

Boone

s1

2.4
1.6
0.0

Amplitude

Color

s1

s2

3.0

1.5

1.5
0.0

2

1

1

0

2

1.6

1.2

0.8

0.4

0.0

0.2

0.1

0.1
0.0

1e 19

0.2

3.2

2.4

1.6

+6.057e4
Reference Time

0.8

8.5

7.0

5.5

4.0

1.5

0.0

s3

1.5

3.0

2

1

0

s2

1

2

0.0

0.4

0.8

1.2

1.6

0.2

0.1

Color

0.1

0.2

0.8

Amplitude

3.2

1e 19

s3

Figure 17. Example of the posterior distributions of the latent variables in the ParSNIP model for a typical light curve in the
PLAsTiCC dataset, sampled with MCMC. Each panel shows the distribution for two different latent variables, and the diagonal
panels show the histograms of individual latent variables.

not observed, we input zero at all times. With this approach, the model can be trained simultaneously on light
curves from different surveys to produce a single latent
representation and decoder model that can be applied
to all surveys. We tested this approach by training the
ParSNIP model simultaneously on the PS1 and PLAsTiCC datasets. We found that the resulting model had
a similar performance to the models trained on the individual datasets, and transients with the same label
in both datasets are encoded at similar locations in the
intrinsic representation.

7. CONCLUSIONS

The ParSNIP model developed in this work is a novel
generative model that describes how the spectra of transients evolve over time. This model combines both a
neural network to describe the intrinsic diversity of transients and an explicit physics model of how light from
transients propagates through the universe and is observed. It can be trained using only a large dataset of
light curves without requiring spectra or labels.
We demonstrated the effectiveness of our model both
on both real (PS1) and simulated (PLAsTiCC) data.
With a three-parameter intrinsic representation, we are
able to reproduce out-of-sample light curves with model
uncertainties of ∼0.06 mag for the PS1 dataset and
∼0.04 mag for the PLAsTiCC dataset. We also find

ParSNIP: Generative Models of Transient Light Curves
that we are able to accurately predict the spectra of
the transients despite only training on photometry. The
ParSNIP model can estimate the distances to wellobserved light curves of SNe Ia with an uncertainty of
0.150 ± 0.007 mag compared to 0.155 ± 0.008 mag for
the SALT2 model on the same sample of SNe Ia.
Our model achieves state-of-the-art results for photometric classification. It produces an intrinsic representation that is independent of redshift, which means that it
not highly sensitive to the biases in training sets that are
a major challenge for other methods. For classification
of SNe Ia, the ParSNIP model produces a sample that
has 2 times less contamination compared to the SuperRAENN model on the PS1 dataset, and 2.3 times less
contamination compared to the Avocado model on the
PLAsTiCC dataset. The performance of the ParSNIP
model is stable across all redshifts and does not require
the use of techniques such as redshift augmentation. Our
model can also be used to detect novel transients. In a
simulated dataset, of 100 novel transients suggested by
our algorithm, 90% of them are a new kind of transient
that had never previously been observed.
All of the results in this paper can be reproduced with
the publicly available parsnip software package 1 . This
package contains instructions for how to access all of
the data that was used in our analyses. It also contains
Jupyter notebooks that can be used to reproduce all of
the figures in this paper.

25

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Andrew Connolly, Kara Ponder, Stephen
Portillo, John Franklin Crenshaw, Greg Aldering, Saul
Perlmutter, and the anonymous referee for valuable feedback and discussions. K. B. acknowledges support from
the DiRAC Institute in the Department of Astronomy
at the University of Washington. The DiRAC Institute
is supported through generous gifts from the Charles
and Lisa Simonyi Fund for Arts and Sciences, and the
Washington Research Foundation.
The Pan-STARRS1 Surveys (PS1) and the PS1 public
science archive have been made possible through contributions by the Institute for Astronomy, the University
of Hawaii, the Pan-STARRS Project Office, the MaxPlanck Society and its participating institutes, the Max
Planck Institute for Astronomy, Heidelberg and the Max
Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics, Garching,
The Johns Hopkins University, Durham University, the
University of Edinburgh, the Queen’s University Belfast,
the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, the
Las Cumbres Observatory Global Telescope Network
Incorporated, the National Central University of Taiwan, the Space Telescope Science Institute, the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration under Grant No.
NNX08AR22G issued through the Planetary Science Division of the NASA Science Mission Directorate, the
National Science Foundation Grant No. AST-1238877,
the University of Maryland, Eotvos Lorand University
(ELTE), the Los Alamos National Laboratory, and the
Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation.

Facilities: PS1
Software: Astropy (Astropy Collaboration et al.
2013, 2018), corner (Foreman-Mackey 2016), emcee
(Foreman-Mackey et al. 2013), Extinction (Barbary
2016) Jupyter (Kluyver et al. 2016), LightGBM (Ke
et al. 2017), Matplotlib (Hunter 2007), NumPy (van der
Walt et al. 2011), PyTorch (Paszke et al. 2019), scikitlearn (Pedregosa et al. 2011), SciPy (Jones et al. 2001),
SNCosmo (Barbary et al. 2016)
REFERENCES
Alves, C. S., Peiris, H. V., Lochner, M., et al. 2021, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2107.07531.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.07531

1 https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5493509

Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J.,
et al. 2013, A&A, 558, A33,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201322068
Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Sipőcz, B. M.,
et al. 2018, AJ, 156, 123, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aabc4f
Barbary, K. 2016, extinction v0.3.0, Zenodo,
doi: 10.5281/zenodo.804967

26
Barbary, K., Biswas, R., Goldstein, G., et al. 2016,
sncosmo, Zenodo, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.592747
Bazin, G., Palanque-Delabrouille, N., Rich, J., et al. 2009,
A&A, 499, 653, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/200911847
Beers, T. C., Flynn, K., & Gebhardt, K. 1990, AJ, 100, 32,
doi: 10.1086/115487
Bepler, T., Zhong, E., Kelley, K., Brignole, E., & Berger, B.
2019, in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, ed. H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer,
F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, & R. Garnett, Vol. 32 (Curran
Associates, Inc.). https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/
2019/file/5a38a1eb24d99699159da10e71c45577-Paper.pdf
Betoule, M., Kessler, R., Guy, J., et al. 2014, A&A, 568,
A22, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201423413
Boone, K. 2019, AJ, 158, 257,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab5182
Boone, K., Aldering, G., Antilogus, P., et al. 2021a, ApJ,
912, 70, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abec3c
—. 2021b, ApJ, 912, 71, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abec3b
Chambers, K. C., Magnier, E. A., Metcalfe, N., et al. 2016,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1612.05560.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.05560
Crenshaw, J. F., & Connolly, A. J. 2020, AJ, 160, 191,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abb0e2
Fitzpatrick, E. L., & Massa, D. 2007, ApJ, 663, 320,
doi: 10.1086/518158
Foreman-Mackey, D. 2016, The Journal of Open Source
Software, 1, 24, doi: 10.21105/joss.00024
Foreman-Mackey, D., Hogg, D. W., Lang, D., & Goodman,
J. 2013, PASP, 125, 306, doi: 10.1086/670067
Graziani, R., Rigault, M., Regnault, N., et al. 2020, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2001.09095.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.09095
Guillochon, J., Nicholl, M., Villar, V. A., et al. 2018, ApJS,
236, 6, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/aab761
Guillochon, J., Parrent, J., Kelley, L. Z., & Margutti, R.
2017, ApJ, 835, 64, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/835/1/64
Guy, J., Astier, P., Baumont, S., et al. 2007, A&A, 466, 11,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20066930
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., & Sun, J. 2016, in 2016 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 770–778, doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90
Higgins, I., Matthey, L., Pal, A., et al. 2017, in 5th
International Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017,
Conference Track Proceedings (OpenReview.net).
https://openreview.net/forum?id=Sy2fzU9gl
Hložek, R., Ponder, K. A., Malz, A. I., et al. 2020, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2012.12392.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.12392

Boone
Hlozek, R., Kunz, M., Bassett, B., et al. 2012, ApJ, 752, 79,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/752/2/79
Hosseinzadeh, G., Dauphin, F., Villar, V. A., et al. 2020,
ApJ, 905, 93, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abc42b
Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing in Science & Engineering, 9,
90, doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55
Ishida, E. E. O., Beck, R., González-Gaitán, S., et al. 2019,
MNRAS, 483, 2, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty3015
Ishida, E. E. O., Kornilov, M. V., Malanchev, K. L., et al.
2021, A&A, 650, A195,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202037709
Ivezić, Ž., Kahn, S. M., Tyson, J. A., et al. 2019, ApJ, 873,
111, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab042c
Jones, D. O., Scolnic, D. M., Riess, A. G., et al. 2018, ApJ,
857, 51, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aab6b1
Jones, E., Oliphant, T., Peterson, P., et al. 2001, SciPy:
Open source scientific tools for Python.
http://www.scipy.org/
Ke, G., Meng, Q., Finley, T., et al. 2017, in Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 30, ed. I. Guyon,
U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus,
S. Vishwanathan, & R. Garnett (Curran Associates,
Inc.), 3146–3154
Kerzendorf, W. E., Vogl, C., Buchner, J., et al. 2021, ApJL,
910, L23, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/abeb1b
Kessler, R., Narayan, G., Avelino, A., et al. 2019, PASP,
131, 094501, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ab26f1
Kingma, D. P., & Ba, J. 2015, in 3rd International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San
Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track
Proceedings, ed. Y. Bengio & Y. LeCun.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980
Kingma, D. P., & Welling, M. 2014, in 2nd International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014,
Banff, AB, Canada, April 14-16, 2014, Conference Track
Proceedings, ed. Y. Bengio & Y. LeCun.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114
Kluyver, T., Ragan-Kelley, B., Pérez, F., et al. 2016, in
Positioning and Power in Academic Publishing: Players,
Agents and Agendas, ed. F. Loizides & B. Schmidt, IOS
Press, 87 – 90
Kulkarni, T. D., Whitney, W. F., Kohli, P., & Tenenbaum,
J. 2015, in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, ed. C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, D. Lee,
M. Sugiyama, & R. Garnett, Vol. 28 (Curran Associates,
Inc.). https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2015/file/
ced556cd9f9c0c8315cfbe0744a3baf0-Paper.pdf
Kullback, S., & Leibler, R. A. 1951, The Annals of
Mathematical Statistics, 22, 79 ,
doi: 10.1214/aoms/1177729694

ParSNIP: Generative Models of Transient Light Curves
Léget, P. F., Gangler, E., Mondon, F., et al. 2020, A&A,
636, A46, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201834954
Lochner, M., McEwen, J. D., Peiris, H. V., Lahav, O., &
Winter, M. K. 2016, ApJS, 225, 31,
doi: 10.3847/0067-0049/225/2/31
LSST Science Collaboration, Abell, P. A., Allison, J., et al.
2009, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:0912.0201.
https://arxiv.org/abs/0912.0201
Malz, A. I., Hložek, R., Allam, T., J., et al. 2019, AJ, 158,
171, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab3a2f
Mandel, K. S., Thorp, S., Narayan, G., Friedman, A. S., &
Avelino, A. 2020, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2008.07538.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.07538
Martı́nez-Galarza, J. R., Bianco, F. B., Crake, D., et al.
2021, MNRAS, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab2588
Martı́nez-Palomera, J., Bloom, J. S., & Abrahams, E. S.
2020, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2005.07773.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.07773
Möller, A., & de Boissière, T. 2020, MNRAS, 491, 4277,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz3312
Muthukrishna, D., Narayan, G., Mandel, K. S., Biswas, R.,
& Hložek, R. 2019, PASP, 131, 118002,
doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ab1609
Naul, B., Bloom, J. S., Pérez, F., & van der Walt, S. 2018,
Nature Astronomy, 2, 151,
doi: 10.1038/s41550-017-0321-z
Pasquet, J., Pasquet, J., Chaumont, M., & Fouchez, D.
2019, A&A, 627, A21, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201834473
Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., et al. 2019, in Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, ed. H. Wallach,
H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, &
R. Garnett, Vol. 32 (Curran Associates, Inc.).
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/file/
bdbca288fee7f92f2bfa9f7012727740-Paper.pdf
Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., et al. 2011,
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12, 2825

27

Planck Collaboration, Aghanim, N., Akrami, Y., et al.
2020, A&A, 641, A6, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201833910
Pruzhinskaya, M. V., Malanchev, K. L., Kornilov, M. V.,
et al. 2019, MNRAS, 489, 3591,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz2362
Sanders, N. E., Betancourt, M., & Soderberg, A. M. 2015,
ApJ, 800, 36, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/800/1/36
Saunders, C., Aldering, G., Antilogus, P., et al. 2018, ApJ,
869, 167, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaec7e
Schlafly, E. F., & Finkbeiner, D. P. 2011, ApJ, 737, 103,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/737/2/103
Scolnic, D. M., Jones, D. O., Rest, A., et al. 2018, ApJ,
859, 101, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aab9bb
Scovacricchi, D., Nichol, R. C., Bacon, D., Sullivan, M., &
Prajs, S. 2016, MNRAS, 456, 1700,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv2752
Shivvers, I., Filippenko, A. V., Silverman, J. M., et al.
2019, MNRAS, 482, 1545, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty2719
Smartt, S. J., Valenti, S., Fraser, M., et al. 2015, A&A, 579,
A40, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201425237
Spergel, D., Gehrels, N., Baltay, C., et al. 2015, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:1503.03757.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.03757
Swann, E., Sullivan, M., Carrick, J., et al. 2019, The
Messenger, 175, 58, doi: 10.18727/0722-6691/5129
Tschannen, M., Bachem, O., & Lucic, M. 2018, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:1812.05069.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.05069
van der Walt, S., Colbert, S. C., & Varoquaux, G. 2011,
Computing in Science and Engineering, 13, 22,
doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2011.37
Villar, V. A., Cranmer, M., Berger, E., et al. 2021, ApJS,
255, 24, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ac0893
Villar, V. A., Nicholl, M., & Berger, E. 2018, ApJ, 869, 166,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaee6a
Villar, V. A., Hosseinzadeh, G., Berger, E., et al. 2020,
ApJ, 905, 94, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abc6fd

