Draft version October 24, 2024
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX63

Blast: a Web Application for Characterizing the Host Galaxies of Astrophysical Transients
D. O. Jones ,1, ∗ P. McGill ,2, 3, ∗ T. A. Manning ,4 A. Gagliano ,5, 6, 7 B. Wang (王冰洁) ,8, 9, 10
D. A. Coulter ,11 R. J. Foley ,2 G. Narayan ,12, 13 V. A. Villar ,6, 5 L. Braff,2 A. W. Engel ,14
D. Farias ,15 Z. Lai ,16 K. Loertscher,2 J. Kutcka ,2 S. Thorp ,17 and J. Vazquez 12
1 Institute for Astronomy, University of Hawai‘i, 640 N. A‘ohoku Pl., Hilo, HI 96720, USA

arXiv:2410.17322v1 [astro-ph.HE] 22 Oct 2024

2 Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA 93105, USA
3 Space Science Institute, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, 7000 East Ave., Livermore, CA 94550, USA
4 National Center for Supercomputing Applications, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
5 The NSF AI Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental Interactions
6 Center for Astrophysics | Harvard & Smithsonian, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
7 Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
8 Department of Astronomy & Astrophysics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
9 Institute for Computational & Data Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
10 Institute for Gravitation and the Cosmos, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
11 Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
12 Department of Astronomy, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
13 Center for Astrophysical Surveys, National Center for Supercomputing Applications, Urbana, IL, 61801, USA
14 Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, 902 Battelle Blvd, Richland, WA 99354, USA
15 DARK, Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen, Jagtvej 128, DK-2200 Copenhagen Ø Denmark
16 Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, San Francisco State University, San Francisco, CA 94132
17 The Oskar Klein Centre, Department of Physics, Stockholm University, AlbaNova University Centre, SE 106 91 Stockholm, Sweden

ABSTRACT
Characterizing the host galaxies of astrophysical transients is important to many areas of astrophysics, including constraining the progenitor systems of core-collapse supernovae, correcting Type
Ia supernova distances, and probabilistically classifying transients without photometric or spectroscopic data. Given the increasing transient discovery rate in the coming years, there is substantial
utility in providing public, transparent, reproducible, and automatic characterization for large samples of transient host galaxies. Here we present Blast, a web application that ingests live streams
of transient alerts, matches transients to their host galaxies, and performs photometry on coincident
archival imaging data of the host galaxy. The photometry is then used to infer both global host-galaxy
properties and galaxy properties within 2 kpc of the transient location by using the Prospector
Bayesian inference framework, with an acceleration in evaluation speed achieved via simulation-based
inference. Blast provides host-galaxy properties to users via a web browser or an application program interface. The software can be extended to support alternative photometric or SED-fitting
algorithms, and can be scaled via an asynchronous worker queue across multiple compute nodes to
handle the processing of large volumes of transient alerts for upcoming transient surveys. Blast has
been ingesting newly discovered transients from the Transient Name Server since mid-2024, and has
currently measured SED parameters for more than 6000 transients. The service is publicly available
at https://blast.scimma.org/.
1. INTRODUCTION

The properties of transients are fundamentally linked
with the characteristics of the galaxies in which their
progenitor stars form and evolve (e.g., Timmes et al.
2003; Sullivan et al. 2010; Rigault et al. 2013; Anderson
et al. 2015; Moreno-Raya et al. 2016; Taggart & Perley
∗ Joint first author contribution.

2021; Qin & Zabludoff 2024). Therefore, characterizing and understanding the host galaxies of astrophysical transients can play a crucial role in understanding
the transients themselves. Understanding the properties of transient host galaxies, both globally and near
the location of the transient, can aid in understanding
the progenitor systems of core collapse supernovae (SNe)
(e.g., Anderson et al. 2012; Sanders et al. 2012; Anderson
et al. 2015; Hosseinzadeh et al. 2019; Taggart & Perley

2
2021), probe rapidly evolving objects (Wiseman et al.
2020a), and mitigate bias in Type Ia SN (SN Ia) distance measurements (Kelly et al. 2010; Lampeitl et al.
2010; Sullivan et al. 2010) that are then incorporated in
measurements of cosmological parameters (e.g., Scolnic
et al. 2018; Abbott et al. 2019; Jones et al. 2019; Brout
et al. 2022; Möller et al. 2024). Taking into account the
correlations between host galaxy and transient properties is also an important step in planning upcoming transient surveys, including those using the Vera C. Rubin
Observatory and the Nancy G. Roman Space Telescope
(Lokken et al. 2023).
Host-galaxy properties are also useful in classifying
transients (e.g., Foley & Mandel 2013; Kisley et al. 2023)
because they provide discriminating class information
beyond approaches that solely use transient photometry
(e.g., Boone 2019; Qu & Sako 2022). Real-time classification of SNe in the hours to days after explosion can be
particularly vital for making decisions about subsequent
spectroscopic and photometric followup (e.g., Kasliwal
et al. 2019; Muthukrishna et al. 2019; Aleo et al. 2022;
Coulter et al. 2022, 2023), in order to probe the SN progenitor star (e.g., Kilpatrick et al. 2021; Tinyanont et al.
2022), or close-in circumstellar material (e.g., JacobsonGalán et al. 2022). At early times, when very little
light curve data is available, the extra leverage gained
from host information can be particularly important
(Gagliano et al. 2023).
Historically, optimally leveraging host-galaxy information has proven difficult for four main reasons.
Firstly, obtaining the necessary sample sizes needed to
fully understand host galaxies and transient correlations
has been challenging, particularly for rare types (e.g.,
Perley et al. 2016a,b). Secondly, biases in transient
survey design have affected the measured host-galaxy
demographics (for example, surveys that target preselected bright galaxies, e.g., Leaman et al. 2011; Li et al.
2011). Thirdly, photometric/spectroscopic coverage of
the host galaxy has often been limited to optical wavelengths (e.g., Jones et al. 2018). Finally, heterogeneous,
and sometimes inconsistent, methods and models used
to fit broad-band photometry of the host galaxy can in
some cases lead to poor and biased estimation of host
galaxy parameters and their uncertainties (Leja et al.
2017, 2019a; Lower et al. 2020; Hand et al. 2022; Lower
et al. 2022; Nagaraj et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2023b).
The challenges relating to small transient samples
and the design of transient surveys have been largely
addressed with the recent transition from narrowfield galaxy-targeted surveys to wide-field time-domain
surveys, including ASAS-SN (Shappee et al. 2014;
Kochanek et al. 2017), ATLAS (Tonry et al. 2018), Gaia

Photometric Science Alerts (Hodgkin et al. 2021), the
Panoramic Survey Telescope and Rapid Response (PanSTARRS) Survey for Transients (PSST; Huber et al.
2015), the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF; Bellm et al.
2019), and the the Young Supernova Experiment (YSE;
Jones et al. 2021), among others. These modern transient surveys have delivered a larger, more homogeneous
and exponentially growing transient discovery rate over
recent years with 20,713 transients reported in 2023
alone.1 The discovery rate is expected to increase further still with the advent of the Vera Rubin Observatory’s Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST; LSST
Science Collaboration et al. 2009).
For all of these newly discovered transients, there exists coincident, readily-available archival imaging data.
This multi-wavelength archival imaging data ranges
from the infrared (2MASS; Skrutskie et al. 2006, WISE;
Wright et al. 2010) through the optical (SDSS, York
et al. 2000; Blanton et al. 2017; DESI Legacy Imaging Surveys, including the Dark Energy Camera Legacy
Survey, Dey et al. 2019; Pan-STARRS, Chambers et al.
2016a; Flewelling et al. 2020; Magnier et al. 2020) and
the ultraviolet (GALEX; Martin et al. 2005). These
data provide the means to consistently and robustly
measure the host galaxy spectral energy distribution
(SED; e.g., Müller-Bravo & Galbany 2022; Bradley et al.
2022; Duarte et al. 2023; Meldorf et al. 2023) and, when
combined with Bayesian fitting methods (Johnson et al.
2021; Speagle 2020), infer the properties of the host
galaxies of transients as they are discovered. These
available host-galaxy characterization tools and archival
imaging data make addressing the final two challenges
outlined above possible, at least in theory. In practice, the characterization of transient host galaxies requires significant compute when performing photometry
on archival images and fitting models to the resulting
host-galaxy SEDs.
In recent years the transient community has invested
heavily in the development of transient alert brokers
(e.g., MARS, Brown et al. 2013; ANTARES, Saha et al.
2014; AMPEL, Nordin et al. 2019; Fink, Möller et al.
2021; ALeRCE, Förster et al. 2021; Lasair; Smith et al.
2019). These brokers provide a stream of alerts of transients to the community, along with some basic discovery
information. This stream of alerts can then be ingested
by Target and Observation Manager (TOM) platforms
(e.g., YSE-PZ, Coulter et al. 2022, 2023; the RoboNet
Microlensing System, Tsapras et al. 2009; the PESSTO
Marshall, Smartt et al. 2015; the Supernova Exchange,
1 https://www.wis-tns.org/stats-maps

3

blast
Howell & Global Supernova Project 2017; the TOMtoolkit, Street et al. 2018; the Global Relay of Observatories Watching Transients Happen Marshall, Kasliwal
et al. 2019; the Transient Science Server, Smith et al.
2020; and the SNAD ZTF object viewer, Malanchev
et al. 2023), where typically computationally inexpensive value-added services can be run on the transient
(e.g., host-matching, Gagliano et al. 2021; light curve
classification, Aleo et al. 2022) to track and manage followup decisions and data. However, none of the transient alert brokers of TOM platforms currently provide
consistent and automatic host galaxy characterization.
In this paper, we present Blast: an open-source web
application that can ingest live streams of transient
alerts and automatically measure the physical properties of its host galaxy stellar population globally and
locally within 2 kpc of the transient location, using available archival imaging data. In Section 2 we describe the
system architecture of Blast, user interface, and host
galaxy characterization pipeline. In Section 3 we validate Blast’s pipeline against previous studies. In Section 4 we present brief statistics for Blast’s current set
of transient events and discuss future challenges for transient host galaxy characterization in the era of upcoming
large transient surveys. In Section 5 we conclude.
2. BLAST
2

Blast is a web application that ingests, stores, and
processes transients, transient metadata, and transient
host-galaxy data. This data is available to users through
a front end web application and via an Application Program Interface (API). In this section, we will first cover
Blast’s underlying data model and architecture (Section 2.1). Then we will detail Blast’s tasks processing
system and the specific processes that Blast uses to
characterize transient host galaxies (Section 2.2). Finally, we will describe the details of the web application
(Section 2.3) and its deployment (Section 2.4).
2.1. Software Architecture
Blast is built using the Django framework (Django
Software Foundation 2018) and leverages its extensive
ecosystem of available apps and integrations, including Celery and the Django REST Framework (Django
REST Framework 2024). The Blast application is comprised of several components: (1) the Django webserver
that runs both the frontend web app and the backend
API server, (2) a database for primary data storage,
(3) a pool of Celery workers, which are processes that
2 Available at https://blast.scimma.org/ with documentation at

https://blast.readthedocs.io/.

execute asynchronous data processing tasks, (4) a Celery Beat instance for periodic task scheduling, and (5)
a RabbitMQ message broker that provides a communication mechanism between the web app server and the
Celery workers via the Advanced Message Queuing Protocol (AMQP). The overview of the Blast system architecture is shown in Figure 1.
The Blast data model is shown in Figure 2. The goal
of the data model is to store every astrophysical transient and its associated metadata (via the Transient
table), and connect it to its associated host-galaxy information (Host), the photometry of both the host galaxy
as a whole and a circular aperture near the transient
location (Photometry), and its derived physical parameters (SED Parameter Inference). Simultaneously, it
is connected to the data sets needed to provide that information (Aperture, Image Cutout, and Filter). Finally, the tasks are managed by Task and TaskRegister
tables, which record for each transient the tasks that
have been run and the status of those tasks.
2.2. Processing Workflow
Celery Beat periodically executes a task that polls the
Transient Name Server,3 launching processing workflows
for each newly detected transient. Each workflow is
comprised of tasks that Celery schedules to run asynchronously across a pool of workers, maximizing utilization of the available compute resources and completing
workflows as quickly as possible. The workflow is implemented using Celery’s native “canvas” system, which
ensures that tasks in a workflow are executed according to the specified directed acyclic graph (DAG) of
task dependencies (Figure 3). Augmenting the Celery
workflow system is a custom state management system,
whereby completed tasks are marked as “processed”
such that subsequent executions of the same workflow
do not waste time reprocessing the same data. This
supports efficiently resuming prematurely aborted workflows. For example, a global host-galaxy SED-fitting
task will be launched only if the status of that task
is “unprocessed” and host-galaxy photometry has been
performed successfully4 .
2.2.1. Transient Data Ingestion
Blast ingests new astrophysical transients by querying the Transient Name Server5 (TNS) API for tran3 http://wis-tns.org/.
4 Note: The term “task” is overloaded. Sometimes the word “task”

refers to a defined data processing type (e.g., Host SED fitting),
and sometimes it refers to an instance of such a task’s execution.
Hopefully context will make the distinction clear.
5 https://www.wis-tns.org/.

4

Users
Client-side
interactions

Celery
Celery
workers
Celery
workers

workers

API
Web app

RabbitMQ

TNS ingest &
other periodic tasks
Transient
Name Server

Blast application

Webserver

Scripts

Database
Transient
workflows
Other
Other
Other
Public
Data
Public
Data
Public Data
Sources
Sources
Sources

Figure 1. Schematic of the Blast system architecture. Arrows indicate the direction of data flow or interaction. Celery workers
periodically execute tasks including one that polls the Transient Name Server API and stores new transient alert data in the
database. Each alert triggers a transient processing workflow that executes as a set of Celery tasks across all available workers.
The workflow tasks download required data from public online resources as needed and perform the necessary computation
tasks. Users can view and download the resulting data via the web application or programmatically via the API.

sients that have recently been discovered or updated.
This query runs every few minutes by default, but can
be modified to run at any cadence. Additional tasks
can be defined by extending the TaskRunner class and
appending the new class to the list of periodic tasks;
thus a developer could add modules to query data from,
for example, ZTF (likely via, e.g., the Alerce, Lasair,
or ANTARES brokers; Sánchez-Sáez et al. 2021; Smith
et al. 2019; Matheson et al. 2021) or the Rubin Observatory’s LSST.
New transients may also be added manually by authenticated Blast users in one of two ways: the first is
by entering the name of a TNS-reported transient, triggering a query of the TNS API to ingest that transient’s
metadata and initialize the transient workflow; the second is by specifying the name, right ascension, declination, redshift, and class of a transient as an uploaded
document. The second method supports a broader range
of non-public transients or galaxy science.
TNS data includes coordinates of the transient and
redshifts derived from transient spectra, when available.

We also obtain Milky Way reddening estimates from
Schlafly & Finkbeiner (2011) via the dustmaps python
package (Green 2018).
2.2.2. Downloading Imaging Data
The Blast architecture allows individual instruments
and filters to be defined via a file that is ingested into
the database on startup. The user must define image
characteristics like the filter name, survey, units of the
image (usually counts, or counts per second), effective
wavelength, pixel size, zeropoint (when set to a standard
value), and AB offset. With this information, Blast
automatically downloads images, measures photometry,
and performs SED fitting for these user-defined instruments6 .
In this work we use GALEX (Martin et al. 2005),
SDSS (York et al. 2000), Pan-STARRS (Chambers et al.
6 In practice, adding new filters or instruments will also require

re-training the SBI++ model for SED parameter estimation; see
Section 2.2.5.

5

blast
SED
Parameter
Inference

Transient

Aperture

Photometry

Host

Image Cutout

Filter

Figure 2. Simplified schema showing how Blast connects
transients to host galaxies, photometric apertures (local or
global), filters, image cutouts, and ultimately SED inference.
Each box represents a database table, with three lines connecting to a box indicating “many” and a single perpendicular line indicating “one”. For example, each filter can be
associated with many image cutouts, while a given image
cutout is associated with only one filter.

2016b; Flewelling et al. 2020), DES (Dey et al. 2019),
2MASS (Skrutskie et al. 2006), and WISE (Wright
et al. 2010) imaging. Images are downloaded using astroquery (Ginsburg et al. 2019) via MAST for
GALEX images, the Pan-STARRS image cutout service
for Pan-STARRS data,7 IRSA for WISE and 2MASS,8
NOIRLab’s Astro Data Lab for DES (Fitzpatrick et al.
2014; Nikutta et al. 2020), and SDSS DR16 via https:
//data.sdss.org/sas for SDSS imaging downloads (Ahumada et al. 2020). We require images that have accompanying exposure times or weight maps to estimate
reliable photometric errors.
Developers can add additional instruments/filters to
the data model. Because there is no catch-all service for
FITS images, developers need to also add a custom image download function to incorporate new instruments.9
2.2.3. Transient–Host Galaxy Matching
Transients are matched to their host galaxies using
the Galaxies HOsting Supernova Transients (GHOST;
Gagliano et al. 2021) software. By default, GHOST uses
a modified directional light radius method (DLR; Gupta
et al. 2016) to identify the most likely host galaxy in the
Pan-STARRS 3π survey within 60′′ of the queried transient (if not found by name or coordinates in the associated GHOST catalog). SkyMapper at Siding Spring
Observatory (Onken et al. 2024) is used to identify
southern-hemisphere hosts, for its similar filter set and
depth to Pan-STARRS (SkyMapper has a 5-σ singleepoch detection limit of mg ∼23, comparable to PS1’s
stacked photometry). Candidate extended sources are
pre-filtered using PS1 quality flags and a random-forest
classifier optimized for star-galaxy separation. The PS1
source from the stacked source catalog with the lowest
DLR value is selected as the host galaxy; DLR computation uses the Kron radius of the source (Kron 1980),
the elliptical radius computed from the first moment of
the image, in the filter with the highest signal-to-noise
ratio. If the closest source has DLR>1 (indicating that
the transient is beyond the radius of any source), sources
classified in the NASA/IPAC Extragalactic database10
(NED) as galaxies are preferentially associated. We have
found empirically that this update decreases the rate of
misassociations.
7 https://ps1images.stsci.edu/cgi-bin/ps1cutouts.
8 https://irsa.ipac.caltech.edu/frontpage/.
9 See the developer guide at https://blast.readthedocs.io for more

information.

Figure 3. Diagram of the transient workflow directed
acyclic graph (DAG). Tasks are described in Section 2.2.

10 The NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database is funded by the Na-

tional Aeronautics and Space Administration and operated by
the California Institute of Technology.

6
To address the problem of source shredding (galaxies
that become split into multiple resolved segments) for
bright and extended low-redshift galaxies, the GHOST
software has also been modified to first conduct a DLR
association within the GLADE+ catalog (Dálya et al.
2022), which contains 22.5M galaxies and is complete to
a luminosity distance of 47 Mpc. If no association can
be made to a GLADE+ source, the full pipeline is run
among PS1 sources. This triaging approach significantly
reduces runtime for local sources, from ∼60s per PS1 association to ∼10s per GLADE+ association (though we
note that a significant fraction of the PS1 runtime is
added overhead from remote queries that would be unnecessary if the catalogs existed on disk). GHOST also
now takes advantage of hierarchical classifications provided by the SIMBAD astronomical database (Wenger
et al. 2000) to ensure that final associations are not made
to galaxy sub-structures.
GHOST additionally provides photometric redshifts
via Easy PhotoZ for each host galaxy estimated from
a neural network (multilayer perceptron) and spectroscopic redshifts from NED, when available. See Appendix A of Aleo et al. (2022) for additional details on
the model.
2.2.4. Aperture photometry
We perform aperture photometry by first constructing “local” and “global” apertures for each transient in
Blast. For local apertures, we center a circular aperture with 2 kpc radius at the transient location. To
compute the physical size of that radius we use the photometric or spectroscopic redshift to define the physical
size of the aperture assuming a standard ΛCDM cosmology (H0 = 70 km s−1 Mpc−1 , Ωm = 0.315; Planck
Collaboration et al. 2020). For transients without redshift information, we choose to not provide local hostgalaxy properties within some standard aperture as the
interpretation of that information would be unclear (if
an updated redshift is sent to TNS, all tasks are reprocessed).
In a separate validation stage, we ensure that each
filter/instrument has sufficient resolving power at the
angular size of 2 kpc in a given galaxy. Conservatively,
we require that the PSF FWHM of a given instrument is
less than this 2 kpc radius. For this reason, we caution
that the higher the redshift, the fewer the photometric
filters that are used to compute local properties.
For global apertures, we use the Astropy Photutils
(Bradley et al. 2022) package to find and construct
elliptical apertures for each host galaxy identified by
GHOST. Photutils constructs an image segmentation
map of detected sources (> 3σ from all connected pix-

els) and constructs Kron apertures from that map. We
use optical data (preferentially g or r bands from SDSS,
Pan-STARRS, or DES, with 2MASS J as a last resort)
to compute this global aperture. We require that an object have at least 10 connected pixels to be considered a
distinct object (the “deblending” theshold), a relatively
large value that results in more low-redshift galaxies being treated as a single object instead of being deblended
into multiple sources. Despite this, we still have occasional difficulties with under-estimating the proper aperture size in the case of very bright, nearby galaxies.
Because the PSF size of each filter and instrument
varies significantly, we make an approximate adjustment
to the Kron radius for a self-consistent flux measurement
across all images (Figure 4). We increase or decrease
each aperture by the difference in standard deviation of
the seeing between the reference image used to compute
the aperture (typically, g band) and the image of interest. While a perfect correction for the effect of the
convolution of the galaxy light with each PSF would be
morphology dependent, and therefore difficult in practice, this approach gives us an approximate adjustment
that treats the outer edge of galaxy light approximately
the same across wavelengths.
The uncertainties on each image are assumed to be
Poisson-noise dominated and we use the calibrated zeropoints for each image provided by its individual survey.
For WISE filters, uncertainties are correlated pixel-topixel, and we therefore apply a noise correction term as
a function of the number of pixels in an aperture.11
For each aperture, we check whether neighboring
sources are likely to contaminate a given photometric
measurement. We first generate segmentation maps
from both an optical image and the image on which photometry is being performed. If the segmentation map
flags multiple objects within the aperture in either image then the photometry is considered to be “contaminated” and is not used in fitting the SED. Due to the
complexity and intrinsic assumptions required to correct
for contamination within an image, we do not attempt
to model and correct for contaminating sources in the
current work. The effect of this treatment is that images with larger PSFs (e.g., GALEX, WISE) are more
likely to have contaminating sources and are frequently
excluded from SED fitting.
In rare cases, very low-redshift galaxies are deblended
into multiple sources that overlap with our aperture,
and therefore every global photometric detection is con11 Computed by the WISE team and described at https://wise2.

ipac.caltech.edu/docs/release/prelim/expsup/sec2 3f.html.

blast

7

Figure 4. An example of PSF-matched apertures (red ellipses) for SN 2010H for a selection of available cutouts from the UV
to the NIR. Each image is 50′′ ×50′′ in size. The matched host galaxy and SN 2010H’s position are marked as a red and blue
cross, respectively. The directional arrows in the left-most panel have lengths of 20′′ .

sidered contaminated. In these cases, we check to see
whether all photometric measurements are flagged as
contaminated, and if so we consider this a likely case
of a low-redshift galaxy that is not truly contaminated
by neighboring objects. We then issue a warning to the
user (visible via the web application results pages — see
Section 2.3) and include all photometry in the SED fit.
2.2.5. Host SED fitting
SED fitting is performed using Prospector (Leja et al.
2017; Johnson et al. 2021). Within Prospector, we use
the MIST stellar isochrones (Choi et al. 2016; Dotter
2016), and the MILES stellar spectral library (SánchezBlázquez et al. 2006) in the Fast Stellar Population
Synthesis (FSPS) code (Conroy et al. 2009; Conroy &
Gunn 2010a,b). A non-parametric SFH is characterized
by mass formed in seven logarithmically spaced time
bins (Leja et al. 2017), with a continuity prior to ensure smooth transitions between bins (Leja et al. 2019a).
Nebular emission is accounted for using a pre-computed
Cloudy grid (Byler et al. 2017). Dust is modeled by two
components (Charlot & Fall 2000), with a power-law parameterization to a Calzetti et al. 2000 curve (Noll et al.
2009). Emission from an AGN torus is parameterized
as a simplified version of the CLUMPY model (Nenkova
et al. 2008), adding the normalization and dust optical depth as two additional free parameters (Leja et al.
2018). Dust emission (Draine & Li 2007) is incorporated
into all fits. The full set of parameters are described in
Appendix A and Wang et al. (2023a, their Table 1).12
Adopting a full Bayesian approach means that when a
parameter is not constrained by the available data, its
uncertainty is propagated into the rest of the inferred
parameters (i.e., it is essentially treated as a nuisance
parameter and is marginalized over).
12 They are also included in the Blast documentation:

blast.readthedocs.io/en/latest/usage/sed params.html.

https://

In tests on our data we found that obtaining posteriors using the Prospector-α model with nested sampling
(via dynesty; Speagle 2020) could typically take > 24
core-hours of computation. Replacing the generation
of stellar population models (Bruzual & Charlot 2003;
Conroy & Gunn 2010b) with an emulator (Alsing et al.
2020; Hahn et al. 2023; Mathews et al. 2023; Thorp et al.
2024) decreases the computation time to ≳ 15 mins (for
a large-scale application, see Wang et al. 2024). A number of other techniques have also been proposed, including gradient-based samplers (Duane et al. 1987; Hoffman
& Gelman 2011), and samplers based on a normalizing
flow (Karamanis et al. 2022; Wong et al. 2023). Here,
we use the simulation-based inference (SBI) method presented in Wang et al. (2023a) as SBI++. SBI++ is a
neural posterior estimator that quickly returns full posteriors on the full set of model parameters. SBI++ is
constructed using Masked Auto-regressive Flow (Papamakarios et al. 2017), as implemented in the sbi Python
package (Greenberg et al. 2019; Tejero-Cantero et al.
2020). As described in Wang et al. (2023a), the model
has 15 blocks, with each block having two hidden layers
and 500 hidden units.
The SBI++ method expands upon SBI by using
Monte Carlo (MC) sampling to replace missing bands
and out-of-distribution uncertainties. We train our
model on 1.5 million simulated galaxies; 2/3 of galaxies
have parameters randomly drawn from priors representing typical values for e.g., stellar mass, star formation
history, metallicity, etc., while 1/3 use flat priors spanning a wide range of values. The full prior distributions
are listed in Appendix A. Simulated redshift is drawn
from a flat distribution spanning z = 0.0 to z = 0.2
(note that redshift will be fixed to a spectroscopic or
photometric redshift in the SED fitting stage as discussed below). This redshift range encompasses most
bona fide SNe being discovered and reported by current
surveys.

8
From these parameters, FSPS/Prospector produces
model photometry. We add Gaussian noise to that photometry by using the mean signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) as
a function of magnitude measured for each photometric
filter in our data set. We then train a neural density estimator on the simulated training data, which will then
be used to infer the host-galaxy parameters of our real
data. Training each Blast model took approximately
four days on a single Intel “Sapphire Rapids” CPU.
In fitting the data, we use either a spectroscopic or
photometric redshift, where available; if no spectroscopic or photometric redshift exists, we do not attempt
to perform SED parameter estimation. Although future work will include a supplemental trained SBI++
for simultaneously estimating photometric redshifts in
Blast (e.g., Wang et al. 2023a), the current version uses
the GHOST algorithm for photo-zs prior to SED fitting.
While this means that the uncertainties on the redshift
are not propagated into the inferred stellar population
parameters, the most scientifically interesting transients
tend to be spectroscopically classified (i.e., the uncertainties on these redshifts are small), and approximately
30% of host galaxies ingested into Blast to date have
reliable spectroscopic redshifts. We therefore employ a
fixed-redshift version of SBI++ for the initial version of
Blast.
As is implemented in SBI++, if there are missing
bands in the observed photometry, we find 50 nearest
neighbors in the simulated training data to the real data.
For each MC sample we draw 50 posterior samples (i.e.,
2500 posterior samples are used in total). Although the
fluxes of non-detections are measured and recorded, we
do not use < 3σ detections for SED fitting in the current work because the SBI++ framework is trained on
magnitudes to limit the dynamic range of the values.
The full fitting process typically takes between 5 − 10
core-minutes, and is capped at 2 core-hours for an occasional galaxy that may have poorly estimated photometry or have parameters not well-represented by the
simulated training data. In practice, we find that this
occurs just 2% of the time for global SED estimation,
and 0.6% of the time for local estimation. We find that
these failures are frequently the result of data quality
issues that affect the photometry.

2.3. Web Application
The Blast web application is designed to provide each
transient’s processing status, images, photometry, and
SED parameters as transparently as possible. The home
page provides a basic description of Blast and basic
summary statistics of transients ingested and completed.

Figure 5. An example of the Blast transient processing
queue, using a subset of recent and archival transients. For
each transient, basic information such as transient name, discovery date, sky position, redshift, transient class, and Blast
live processing progress are shown. Users can search for transients by name or by some pre-loaded common filters such
as transients with their host-galaxy spectral energy distribution (SED) fitting completed, as shown in this example
screenshot.

Figure 5 shows the “Transients” page, containing a
table of all transients ingested into Blast. For each
transient, the table gives coordinates, type and redshift
(when available), and a status bar indicating progress of
the transient processing workflow. It includes a search
function and drop-down menu allowing the user to see
transients with host-galaxy matches, transients with
photometry, transients with SED fitting results, or transients that have successfully completed all stages.
The transient “Results” page (Figure 6) summarizes
all available information for a given transient. This includes the following:
1. Basic transient information, including coordinates, type, and redshift.
2. Basic host galaxy information, including name, coordinates, redshift, and photometric redshift (if
available).
3. The status of all tasks. Typical status messages
are “unprocessed,” “processed,” “processing,” or
“failed,” and occasionally more informative messages are used to explain why a stage did not complete; for example, “redshift too high,” or “no local
phot” are typical errors when the redshift is out

blast

9

Figure 6. The Blast transient results page for SN 2024fva, including basic information, task statuses, cutout images, photometry, best-fit SED models, and SED parameter estimation. The imaging data panel (top right) allows users to select from all
available cutout images acquired for the transient. Both the imaging data and spectral energy distribution panel (middle right)
are plotted using Bokeh (Bokeh Development Team 2018) which allows the user to interact with the data by means of panning,
zooming, and downloading plots. The user can also download SED best-fit models and posterior parameter estimations from
this page (lower right), and flag issues with blast processing via the report button in the processing status panel (left side).
Finally, users can also download the entire Blast dataset for a transient by clicking the download data button in the top left
corner.

10
of range for our trained SED-fitting model or the
PSFs of all instruments are too broad to probe a
2 kpc physical scale.
4. Interactive plotting of each archival host-galaxy
image (the default is Pan-STARRS g, with alternatives viewable using a drop-down menu). Figures include both the transient and host-galaxy
location as well as the local and global apertures
for which photometry is being measured.
5. Local and global photometric measurements, including magnitude and flux (µJy).
6. Interactive figures with the photometric data.
SED model spectra corresponding to the
16th/50th/84th percentiles from posteriors are
shown with dashed lines.
7. The 16th, 50th, and 84th percentile measurements
of all Prospector-α parameters as well as the following derived parameters: surviving stellar mass,
star formation rate (SFR) and specific star formation rate (sSFR) averaged over the last 100 Myr
(the full star-formation history is also available),
and mean mass-weighted stellar age.
8. Options to download the data. The “Download data” button provides all metadata available for a given transient, including photometry
and SED parameters. There are individual buttons for downloading the best-fit SED model, the
16th/50th/84th percentile parameter values for
every parameter in the Prospector-α model, and
the full posterior chains. A Django Rest Framework API provides more fine-grained information
to the user and can be accessed programatically as
described in our documentation.

accessed via the web interface as well as programmatically. Simple filters help the user sort through tables as
specified in the documentation; for the Transient table this includes filters on transient name and redshift,
and for most other tables, filters allow the user to easily select an associated transient or filter by filtering on
foreign-key relationships as described in the documentation.
2.4. Deployment
There are two methods for deploying Blast: Docker
Compose and Kubernetes.
The Docker Compose
method is ideal for local application development, although it would also suffice as a production instance on
a single machine. In this mode of deployment, the system components described in Section 2.1 are deployed
as local containers with network-based interactions that
closely resemble the way the components are deployed
and interact with one another in the Kubernetes environment. By aligning these two deployment methods
as much as possible, there is minimal overhead involved
in translating newly developed features and bug fixes
from the development to the production environments.
The production deployment is driven by a Helm chart
crafted to exploit the scalability and high availability of
a Kubernetes cluster.
The public deployment of Blast can be found at http:
//blast.scimma.org/ with full documentation at https:
//blast.readthedocs.io/. Blast is deployed on resources
provided by the NSF ACCESS program (Boerner et al.
2023) as part of the Scalable Cyberinfrastructure to support Multi-Messenger Astrophysics (SCiMMA) project
to aid in the characterization of the host galaxies of
multi-messenger sources such as kilonovae. We welcome
new developers and contributors; please read the developer guide in our documentation to get started.13
3. SCIENCE VERIFICATION

The uploads page allows users with a Blast account
to upload transients not currently in the database either by IAU name or by a comma-separated list of object name, right ascension, declination and (optionally)
redshift and transient type. For the former method, information is ingested from TNS and for the latter, no
additional information is necessary before Blast can begin processing. We restrict this page to registered users
to limit the rate of transients ingested to the database,
but for both public and local installations, customizable uploads will make Blast more useful for both older
transients and non-transient science cases that require
galaxy characterization.
Finally, the API provides access to all data associated
with the data model. The Rest Framework API can be

In this section, we present the results of several tests to
ensure that Blast’s data products are reliable and consistent with previous results in the literature. These include host-galaxy matching, Kron aperture estimation,
flux/magnitude measurements in each filter, and SED
parameters.
We note that Blast has occasional failures in each of
these categories, and we attempt to describe potential
failure modes below. Although these occasional issues
might not be obvious if the user downloads data in bulk,
they should all be apparent when viewing the individ13 https://blast.readthedocs.io/en/latest/developer guide/

dev getting started.html.

11

blast
ual web pages in the Blast application. Additionally,
if a user has indicated that a given stage has failed to
complete satisfactorily, this information can be obtained
via the API. Users also have the option of “reporting”
the result of a given stage as erroneous and, in the case
of singular errors like a third-party service going offline,
registered users can request to re-process the entire transient.
3.1. Host Galaxy matching and Kron aperture
determinations
One of the first processing tasks that is run on
transients ingested into Blast is finding a host-galaxy
match. To perform this matching we use the GHOST
software via the astro ghost python package14 .
We validated GHOST’s performance against the hostgalaxy matches of the low redshift (z < 0.1) sample
of 273 SNe Ia from Jones et al. (2018) (Figures 7 and
8). GHOST identifies the same host galaxy in 93.4%
of cases. Occasional failures result in cases where there
is an extended, resolved source galaxy with individual
bright components (SN 2000cn), or cases where there
are several nearby bright sources (the Pan-STARRS SN
420100). We note that it is possible that mismatches
are more common in non-Ia hosts, especially for transients typically hosted by fainter/smaller galaxies, and
we are working closely with the GHOST team to continue reducing the number of host-galaxy mismatches
where possible.
3.2. Kron Aperture Estimation
Figure 4 shows an example of a typical aperture size
across bandpasses (using SN 2010H). Figure 9 shows the
result of our Kron aperture computation for a subset of
Pan-STARRS images.
Our Kron aperture estimation uses the astropy
photutils detect sources algorithm with a 5σ
threshold and a minimum of 10 connected pixels to
find galaxies in an optical image (or 2MASS, in rare
cases where no optical images are available). The
detect sources algorithm constructs a segmentation
map to determine the extent of the host galaxy, which
we find to be robust in nearly all cases. We do not perform an additional step of deblending nearby sources,
as galaxies are typically well-separated and deblending
would result in large nearby star-forming galaxies being separated into multiple objects. The only failure
case we find is that in rare cases involving large, nearby
galaxies, the aperture is not always large enough to encompass faint, extended regions. One compounding fac14 https://github.com/uiucsn/astro ghost.

Figure 7. Cumulative distribution of offsets between
GHOST and the Jones et al. (2018) host galaxies from the
sample of 273 SNe Ia that were checked by eye in Jones et al.
(2018) (two ambiguous matches were removed). We note
that Jones et al. (2018) ran SExtractor on an individual
Pan-STARRS image to find host centroids for the best-fit ellipse (with by-eye verification), while GHOST uses the mean
position from all Pan-STARRS images, resulting in typical
centroid differences of ∼1-2 pixels that are unrelated to the
quality of the choice in host. The vertical line indicates a
2-arcsecond offset. Approximately 88% of SNe have consistent host-galaxy coordinates within 2 arcsec (denoted by the
vertical line), and for an additional ∼5% GHOST has identified the same host galaxy as Jones et al. (2018) but has offset
coordinates for the host center due an extended and/or irregular host galaxy. GHOST identifies a different host galaxy
6.6% of the time (Figure 8).

tor may be that Pan-STARRS images over-subtract the
background near very bright extended sources.
3.3. Global Galaxy Photometry
Comparisons of galaxy photometry to catalog photometry are shown in Figures 10 and 11 for UV/optical
and IR photometry, respectively. For each filter, survey, and telescope, we use publicly provided source catalogs (with the exception of WISE, as described below)
and compare to a randomly selected subset of the hostgalaxy photometry available from Blast at the time of
writing.
The sigma-clipped means are in good agreement with
the survey catalogs for GALEX, SDSS, and 2MASS,
although 2MASS catalog magnitudes become systematically fainter for sources where 2MASS is unable
to detect the wings of the galaxy (compared to the
larger, optically-derived Blast aperture). Pan-STARRS
is consistent in the i-band and slightly offset in the y
band, with this offset likely due to the same reason as
faint 2MASS magnitudes being systematically fainter:
Blast apertures are derived from optical photometry
and therefore better capture flux in the wings of ex-

12

Figure 8. Examples of GHOST (Gagliano et al. 2021) host-galaxy associations compared with Jones et al. (2018) (Jones+18).
The top row shows associations where GHOST and Jones et al. (2018) disagree (host galaxy > 2.0 arcsecond offset), and bottom
row shows agreement (host galaxy < 2.0 arcsecond offset). All images are Pan-STARRS 65×65 arcsecond g-band cutouts. Most
associations shown on the top row are differences in centroids that will result in the same final host-galaxy apertures, but
SN 2000cn shows a case where GHOST is definitely incorrect and SN 420100 shows a case where GHOST is likely incorrect.

Figure 9. Examples of computed elliptical apertures for photometry from Blast using g-band images from Pan-STARRS. The
SN position (blue) and the host-galaxy position (red) are shown along with the host-galaxy aperture used for photometry (red
ellipses). Bars show the size of 10′′ in each image.

tended sources. However, at faint magnitudes, Blast
finds slightly fainter magnitudes than Pan-STARRS on
average. Although we are not sure of the reason for the
discrepancy, visual inspection of several outliers appears
to indicate that the background in redder bands could
be under-subtracted in the Pan-STARRS imaging causing artifically brighter catalog sources.
For WISE, the catalog magnitudes use profile-fitting
photometry, which is inaccurate for extended sources;
the Blast photometry is ∼0.5 mag brighter than the
catalog photometry. When we instead compare to WISE

forced photometry at the location of SDSS galaxies from
Lang et al. (2016), we find that Blast photometry is
0.25 mag fainter on average than sources from the unWISE catalog, which could indicate a systematic difference in aperture between the two catalogs and may
also impact the number of contaminating sources. For
our baseline comparison, however, we use the method
of Jarrett et al. (2019, 2023), which was performed by
T. Jarrett (private comm.) on the Jones et al. (2018)
sample (Figure 11). We see slightly fainter magnitudes
in Blast (0.15 mag in W 1), which may indicate that the

13

blast
WISE PSF size is slightly underestimated, but no trend
as a function of magnitude.
Upon visual inspection of the 3-σ outliers, which are
∼5-10% of the measurements, we find that nearly all
are due to complex host-galaxy environments with significant galaxy contamination. To eliminate these data,
we generated segmentation maps to find contaminating
objects within a given aperture and remove this contaminated photometry from the set used for SED parameter
estimation. It is also possible that some significant IR
emission is beyond the global aperture radius inferred
from the optical data and causes systematic differences.
3.4. SED Parameters
We compare our transient host-galaxy results to several literature samples to ensure consistent and reliable
SED fitting results. Although relatively few literature
samples exist with a low-redshift Prospector-α model
specifically, we searched for consistency in parameter
measurements using the sources below. These predominantly use the SN Ia sample from Jones et al. (2018),
who analyzed 273 SNe from datasets spanning 19902015, but also include a recent Prospector analysis from
Ramsden et al. (2022). SED validation figures are presented in Appendix B, as described below:
1. Global and local masses from Jones et al. (2018).
This sample used Z-PEG (Le Borgne & RoccaVolmerange 2002) to measure global and local,
2 kpc masses for archival SN Ia data.
2. Global specific star formation rates (sSFRs) from
Jones et al. (2018) using LePHARE (Arnouts &
Ilbert 2011). We clip very low sSFRs as galaxies
with negligible star formation unsurprisingly show
exceptionally high sSFR scatter.
3. WISE-based masses and sSFRs for the Jones et al.
(2018) sample from T. Jarrett (private communication).
4. Masses and sSFRs from the (Ramsden et al. 2022)
tidal disruption event sample.
Below, we briefly describe these comparisons between
Blast masses, star formation rates, stellar metallicities,
and dust parameters between Blast and other sources
in the literature.
3.5. Stellar Masses
In global mass, there is good agreement between Jones
et al. (2018) and Blast, with a median offset of 0.07 dex
and a dispersion of 0.20 dex. For local mass, because
Jones et al. (2018) uses a 1.5 kpc aperture and Blast

uses 2 kpc, we apply a correction to the Jones et al.
(2018) values that assumes the mass profile is unchanged
between the two apertures; this is likely a poor approximation for the lowest-mass regions, which may be more
concentrated, and can be seen for the departure from
the y = x line at local log(M∗ /M⊙ ) < 8.5. The median
offset in local mass is 0.37 dex with a scatter of 0.25 dex.
We also compare to masses derived only from WISE
infrared bands, following Jarrett et al. (2023). There
is no obvious trend between Blast and WISE-derived
masses, with a median offset of 0.060 dex and a dispersion of just 0.12 dex. We note that Leja et al. (2019b)
found that using a non-parametric star-formation history leads to stellar masses that are larger by ∼0.1–
0.3 dex as compared to simpler models, which may explain the offset. These larger masses are caused by systematically older SFHs inferred from the more flexible
non-parametric model, and Leja et al. (2019b) argue
that the improved flexibility in modeling the SFH resolves a long-standing tension between the cosmic SFR
density and the stellar mass growth.
The relatively small set of masses from Ramsden et al.
(2022) have an offset of −0.043 dex and a scatter of
0.19 dex compared to Blast15 ; while this difference is
somewhat larger than may be expected given that Ramsden et al. (2022) use the same Prospector-α model as
Blast, the photometry, aperture determination, and criteria for choosing which photometric bands are included
are different. There are also likely somewhat different
choices in parameters and priors, as well as different
star-formation history bins.
We note that additional mass comparisons between
Blast and the scaling relation from Taylor et al. (2011)
are published in Peterson et al. (2024, their Appendix
A). These show largely consistent masses, with no obvious offset or bias across the full dynamic range.
3.6. Star Formation Rates
We compare the Blast sSFR to the Jones et al. (2018)derived sSFR from LePHARE as well as sSFRs derived
from the WISE mid-infrared bands following Salim et al.
(2016); Leroy et al. (2019).
Blast measurements are consistent with measurements from Jones et al. (2018) and WISE-derived measurements, with comparison figures shown in Appendix
B. Compared to Jones et al. (2018) the median offset in
sSFR is 0.15 dex, although the scatter is a relatively high
0.73 dex. As can be seen in Figure 16, Blast finds that
SNe with the highest sSFR in Jones et al. (2018) appear
15 We first convert the Blast-reported surviving stellar mass to the

total formed stellar mass for this comparison.

14

Figure 10. Representative comparisons of Blast photometry compared to catalog magnitudes for GALEX, SDSS, and PanSTARRS (left to right). The σ-clipped mean and standard deviation are shown with the dashed black line and grey shaded
region, respectively and the binned median is in orange. The median offset and percentage of 3σ outliers are labeled.

Figure 11. Same as Figure 10. Statistics for 2MASS J include only objects with J < 15. WISE W 1 catalog magnitudes are
using the method of Jarrett et al. (2023); there are significant discrepancies (0.5 mag or greater) with the default WISE catalog
magnitudes because they assume unresolved sources.

to be overestimated. As Jones et al. (2018) is based
only upon ugrizy photometry, Blast is likely more robust. We note that the Jones et al. (2018) sSFRs were
updated with an improved extinction treatment in Kim
et al. (2024, also using LePHARE), and for these we
find qualitatively the same results. The mean offset is
somewhat increased to 0.37 dex and the slightly higher
scatter of 0.87 dex is primarily driven by the low-sSFR
end.
For WISE, we find slightly lower sSFR from Blast,
with a median offset of 0.11 dex and an improved scatter,
compared to Jones et al. 2018, of 0.52 dex.
3.7. Metallicity and Dust Parameters
Most other Prospector-α parameters16 have larger uncertainties than stellar mass and sSFR. Although there
are relatively few literature studies using Prospector-α
16 A complete list is given in the Blast documentation at https:

//blast.readthedocs.io/en/latest/usage/sed params.html.

at the low redshifts where Blast is trained, we show
comparisons with Ramsden et al. (2022) in Appendix
B as a general consistency check. Because we use a
full Bayesian approach, we note that in the case where
these parameters are unconstrained by the data, Blast
returns the priors as given in Appendix A and these priors are properly propagated into the uncertainties of the
other inferred parameters.
In their Table B1, Ramsden et al. (2022) report the
stellar metallicity log(Z∗ /Z⊙ ), and the dust parameters
τdust,2 , n, and τdust,1 /τdust,2 . The n parameter is the
power-law index of a modified Calzetti et al. (2000) dust
attenuation law (Noll et al. 2009), the τdust,2 parameter
is the optical depth of diffuse dust, and τdust,1 /τdust,2 is
the optical depth of stellar birth-cloud dust as a fraction
of the diffuse-dust optical depth (this split is based on
the Charlot & Fall 2000 model). The log(Z∗ /Z⊙ ) and
τdust,2 comparisons are shown in Appendix B.
The value of τdust,1 /τdust,2 is likely not well constrained and instead returns the prior, which has σ =

15

blast
0.3; the scatter in measurements is just ∼0.06, but the
uncertainty on most measurements is ∼0.3. The τdust,2
parameter has an offset of −0.21 and a scatter of 0.27;
the correlation coefficient between this work and the
Ramsden et al. (2022) values is 0.30. The other two parameters (shown in Appendix B) agree relatively well,
with outliers having slight differences in photometry or
included bands, but with no obvious indications of poor
photometry. There is general consistency in the n parameter, which has an average offset of ∼0.1 and a scatter of 0.52. The large outlier in n is 2019azh, which
may be due to the fact that Blast does not include
the 2MASS bands for this object (and both Blast and
Ramsden et al. 2022 show poor fits to the WISE W3
band). For the stellar metallicity, there appears to be a
possible systematic disagreement at the high-metallicity
end at the ∼ 1.5σ level for individual measurements.
However, it is worth pointing out that stellar metallicity is not expected to be tightly constrained by broadband photometry alone, so we do not further explore the
origin of such systematic offset.
4. SCIENCE APPLICATIONS AND CURRENT

STATISTICS
Currently, Blast has ingested more than 13000 transients. For over 11,000 of these, GHOST has been able
to identify likely host galaxies, with most of the remaining transients likely to be stellar flares or hostless SNe
(limits on the environments of hostless SNe, e.g., Pessi
et al. 2024; Qin et al. 2024, would be extremely interesting but are beyond the scope of the current work). For
∼10,500, host-galaxy photometry was performed; most
transients failing at this stage are either lacking redshifts, without which a 2kpc local aperture cannot be
computed, and/or are lacking optical data in the Southern sky, which is often necessary to compute an aperture
when the host galaxy is undetected in 2MASS.
SED parameters have been successfully estimated for
approximately 85% of recent transients, though we note
that past software bugs have prevented SED estimation
for some of our sample, with the result that only ∼50%
of the full Blast database currently has estimated SEDs.
Currently, the most common failure modes in SED
parameter estimation are:
1. Redshifts (spectroscopic or photometric) with z >
0.2, which is beyond the limit of our training sample. Sometimes transients are too distant for our
current Blast training, but more often the photometric redshifts are inaccurate. Future photo-z
estimation within SBI++ itself would improve this
issue and give more robust posterior estimation.

Alternatively, a possible future avenue for extending or supplementing the redshift range and
parameter space would be the use of emulated
SPS (e.g., Alsing et al. 2020) in combination with
conventional posterior sampling. This approach
has been demonstrated on large galaxy catalogs
(Thorp et al. 2024), and can be combined with
a calibrated population prior (e.g., Alsing et al.
2024) for improved parameter constraints.
2. The redshift is too distant to resolve a 2 kpc radius
for local photometry. As transients become farther
away, we lose the ability to use WISE, GALEX,
and 2MASS for SED parameter estimation.
3. Relatively few photometric bands are available.
Complex host-galaxy backgrounds can cause unreliable aperture photometry, which in turn may
cause the photometry to fail our validation cuts.
4. Extremely large or complex host backgrounds
(Figure 14). Automated host identification and
aperture estimation for large host galaxies with
multiple resolved star clusters, mergers, or other
complex morphologies is an ongoing challenge at
the lowest redshifts.
4.1. Science Applications
The Blast application enables host-property inference
for individual objects of interest or large-statistics studies of SN types or subtypes. We envision that key science
applications for Blast will include:
• The Progenitors of Astrophysical Transients. Comparing the environments in which different SN subtypes have been found has shown
that stripped-envelope SNe likely originate from
binary systems (Smith et al. 2011; Yoon 2015),
that SN Ic progenitors are more massive than
SNe Ib or II (Anderson et al. 2012), and provided
strong evidence that the progenitors of interacting
SN IIn maybe be more similar in mass to those
of other SN II than previously thought (Anderson
et al. 2015). Host galaxy studies have been also
useful in deducing the nature of rapidly evolving
transients (Wiseman et al. 2020a), Type Ibn supernovae (Hosseinzadeh et al. 2019), SNIc associated with gamma-ray bursts (Modjaz et al. 2020),
superluminous supernovae (Lunnan et al. 2015),
and fast blue optical transients (Drout et al. 2014;
Ho et al. 2020). Blast unlocks unprecedented statistical leverage for answering many of these questions and provides simple, transparent parameter
estimation for individual transients of interest.

16

Figure 12. Representative cumulative distribution functions of Blast-derived SED properties for SNe Ia, Ic, and II. Blast
shows that SNe Ic prefer locally young regions and globally metal-poor galaxies compared to SNe II. SNe Ia are found in the
oldest regions and most metal-rich environments on average. SNe Ib and SNe II have similar host-galaxy environments, implying
similar progenitor properties.

et al. 2023; Lokken et al. 2023). With real-time
SED fitting, Blast makes detailed understanding
of a transient’s host-galaxy properties available
quickly. These SED properties can be used to
inform transient follow-up decisions and to train
classification algorithms.

Figure 13. Local versus global sSFR for different subtypes
in Blast, including SNe Ia (blue), Ib (orange), Ic (green), and
II (red), with 95% confidence ellipses. While most CC SNe
tend to have similar local and global properties, SNe Ia have
a greater diversity.

• Using Host-Galaxy Properties to Classify
Astrophysical Transients. Given the thousands of transients discovered each month, classifying and selecting those transients for which
additional followup would be scientifically valuable can be critical. Host galaxy based classifiers
can provide independent contextual information
compared to SN light curve-based classifications
given the preferentially different host-galaxy environments of different SN types (Foley & Mandel
2013; Gagliano et al. 2021; Qin et al. 2022; Kisley

• Understanding Cosmological Parameter
Measurements from Type Ia SNe. Distance
measurements from SNe Ia can be used to measure the Hubble constant (H0 ; e.g., Freedman et al.
2019; Riess et al. 2022), the dark energy equation
of state (e.g., Brout et al. 2022; Vincenzi et al.
2024), and the growth of structure in the nearby
Universe (e.g., Boruah et al. 2020; Stahl et al.
2021). However, interpreting these measurements
is complicated by the fact that inferred distance
measurements from SNe Ia have been shown to
correlate with a number of the physical properties
of their host galaxies (Kelly et al. 2010; Lampeitl
et al. 2010; Sullivan et al. 2010; Rigault et al. 2013;
Jones et al. 2018; Wiseman et al. 2020b; Brout &
Scolnic 2021; Wiseman et al. 2023; Dixon et al.
2024; Grayling et al. 2024; Popovic et al. 2024;
Ye et al. 2024). In the absence of a consensus
for which physical mechanisms are responsible for
SN Ia–host-galaxy correlations, Blast provides a
robust, transparent approach for measuring these
host-galaxy properties and thereby controlling for
the effects of host-galaxy properties on cosmological inference.

blast
In Figure 12, we show two representative cumulative
distributions of SED parameters for different spectroscopically classified SNe currently processed by Blast:
the mass-weighted stellar age at the location of each
SN, and the stellar metallicity for the full host galaxy.
Median uncertainties are ∼2 Gyr for the local stellar
age and ∼0.28 dex for log(Z∗ /Z⊙ ). Using a K-S test
we find at high significance that SN Ic are have younger
stellar ages near their explosion sites than SNe Ia and
that all core-collapse types have lower stellar metallicities than SNe Ia. While K–S tests for other comparisons
indicate that the difference between CC SN subtype and
SNe Ia distributions are not statistically significant, the
difference between the medians are 2.4–6σ significant
for global stellar metallicity and 1.4–3.8σ significant for
all local age comparisons except for SNe Ib and SNe II,
which are statistically identical. With the caveat that
observed differences in the median local stellar age of
CC SN types have marginal (1-2σ) significance, the distributions shown in Figure 12 broadly reproduce the expected results: the median SN Ic has a younger stellar age and lower host metallicity than SNe Ia or other
CC SNe. The SNe Ib and SN II have similar distributions, which could imply (as pointed out by, e.g., Anderson et al. 2012, 2015) that SN Ib are stripped due
to binary interactions and have similar progenitor systems to SN II. SNe Ia have the oldest stellar ages and
the highest mean metallicities.
This figure is just an illustration of Blast’s capabilities, and does not account for selection effects, nor does
it attempt to use the full sample of available SED properties or the full set of recent SNe from TNS. Nevertheless, it shows that even some of the more difficult SED
parameters to infer robustly can be used to meaningfully
probe the nature of transient progenitor systems.
In Figure 13 we also show local versus global sSFR
for different SN subtypes in Blast. While SN Ib and Ic
largely have similar local and global sSFR, SN Ia have
a large amount of diversity. We find that a significant
number of SNe Ia have higher local than global sSFR;
though noise may play a role, we also see from visual
inspection that several are in bulge-dominated, largely
passive galaxies with residual star-formation activity in
the disk (SN 2000B is one example in our dataset).
As another illustration, we also searched for galaxies near the extremes of the mass and SFR distributions. We note that the current set of host galaxies in
the Blast database includes host galaxies of transients
reported to TNS beginning in early 2024 as well as transients of interest for certain science cases from our team’s
collaborators, which may bias us toward unusual transients. Two of the lowest-mass host galaxies found are

17

Figure 14. Blast page for the merging starburst host of
SN 2019lqo, as well as at least seven additional SNe over
the last 20 years. A user has marked the global aperture
photometry as spurious due to the difficulty in automated
modeling of complex host-galaxy backgrounds.

SN 2021adxl (Brennan et al. 2023), a Hydrogen-rich superluminous SN at z = 0.018 and SN 2021qvo, a 2003fglike SN Ia at z = 0.05 (Paniagua et al. in prep.). Both
of these SN types tend to favor faint, low-metallicity
hosts, and Blast reports that both have stellar masses
log(M∗ /M⊙ ) ≲ 8 dex and metallicities ≲ −0.5Z⊙ .
On the other hand, SN 2019lqo was hosted by
NGC 3690, the most highly star-forming galaxy with
mass >10 dex in the Blast database (Figure 14).
NGC 3690 hosted at least six other core-collapse SNe in
the last 20 years: SNe 2005U, 2010O, 2010P, 2020fkb,
2022gnp, and 2024gzk, as well as the SN Ia 2023wrk.
One of the other examples of a massive, star-forming
galaxy was the host of 1991T-like SN 2024gpn, which
also hosted the SN Ia 2018btm. One final interesting case is SN 2024crn, which is a SN Ia hosted by a
galaxy cluster at z = 0.17 — possibly in the intracluster
medium — but coincidentally happened to be 26′′ from
the center of a low-redshift star-forming galaxy, which
was spuriously identified as having log(M∗ /M⊙ ) >
12 dex due to the incorrectly assigned redshift.
As the Blast dataset expands over the coming years,
we hope it will provide unprecedented statistical leverage on both rare and common SN subtypes. We hope

18
that the user community will help to expand its capabilities, and will benefit from Blast’s public, transparent
SED fitting and host-galaxy photometry for the transient community.
5. CONCLUSIONS

Here we present Blast, a web application for characterizing transient host galaxies. The goal of Blast is
to provide transparent, reproducible, public estimation
of the physical properties of transient host galaxies and
the local regions near where transients occur. This will
help infer the nature of the diverse progenitor systems
of astrophysical transients.
Blast is constructed in the Django framework, implementing a web application and API server that orchestrates a pool of Celery workers to execute tasks including ingesting new transients, downloading archival
images, matching transients to a probable host galaxy,
computing global and local apertures for photometry,
and performing SED-fitting with Prospector as implemented by the SBI++ neural posterior estimator (Leja
et al. 2017; Johnson et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2023a).
All tasks for a given transient are typically completed
within 30 minutes after ingestion. The Blast webpages
have interactive plots of cutout images and SED fitting
results to aid transparency, as well as tables with SED
parameters, photometry, and both transient and hostgalaxy metadata. All data are available via the API.
Validation of the different Blast stages demonstrates
that there are some failure modes at the few-percent
level across host-galaxy identification, aperture estimation, photometry, and SED fitting. While these
will continue to be improved in the coming years, we
find that Blast is largely robust across the diverse
set of transient/host-galaxy properties contained in our
dataset. Blast’s web-based framework also allows users
to easily evaluate whether a given measurement is erroneous and report it. We report good consistency with
other photometric catalogs, and can accurately reproduce independent SED estimation performed in the literature.
We hope to extend Blast in the future by incorporating a broader transient redshift range, host galaxy-based
transient classifications, and potentially additional SEDfitting algorithms for alternative SPS models or parameter estimation methodologies. As the Vera Rubin Observatory and the Roman Space Telescope come online,
and as future LIGO observing runs discover multimessenger objects, there is a novel opportunity for valueadded services such as this one to create new scientific
opportunities and maximize the potential for discovery
in the coming years.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Dedicated to the memory of Tom Jarrett, who was
invaluable in helping us to evaluate the success of our
SED fitting and work with the WISE data during the
preparation of this manuscript.
D.O.J. and P.M. acknowledge support from NASA
grant 80NSSC21K0834. P.M. also acknowledges that
this work was partly performed under the auspices of
the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under Contract DE-AC5207NA27344. The document number is LLNL-JRNL870752. D.O.J. acknowledges support from HST grants
HST-GO-17128.028 and HST-GO-16269.012, awarded
by the Space Telescope Science Institute (STScI), which
is operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc., for NASA, under contract NAS5-26555. D.O.J. also acknowledges support from NSF grant AST-2407632 and NASA grant
80NSSC24M0023. ST was supported by funding from
the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programmes (grant agreement no. 101018897 CosmicExplorer). This work is supported by the National Science Foundation under Cooperative Agreement PHY2019786 (The NSF AI Institute for Artificial Intelligence
and Fundamental Interactions, http://iaifi.org/).
Blast’s public interface is operated by the Scalable
Cyberinfrastructure for Multi-Messenger Astrophysics
(SCiMMA) team under OAC-2311355, supporting the
work of TAM and GN, GN also gratefully acknowledges NSF support from NSF CAREER grant AST2239364, supported in-part by funding from Charles Simonyi, NSF AST 2421845 and support from the Simons
Foundation as part of the NSF-Simons SkAI Institute,
AST 2432428, AST 2206195, and DOE support through
the Department of Physics at the University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign (# 13771275), and support from
the HST Guest Observer Program through HST-GO16764. and HST-GO-17128 (PI: R. Foley).
This research uses services or data provided by the Astro Data Lab, which is part of the Community Science
and Data Center (CSDC) Program of NSF NOIRLab.
NOIRLab is operated by the Association of Universities
for Research in Astronomy (AURA), Inc. under a cooperative agreement with the U.S. National Science Foundation. This research has made use of the NASA/IPAC
Infrared Science Archive, which is funded by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and operated by the California Institute of Technology.

blast
This work used Jetstream2 at Indiana University
and Open Storage Network at NCSA through allocation PHY240068 from the Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Coordination Ecosystem: Services & Support (ACCESS) program, which is supported by National Science
Foundation grants #2138259, #2138286, #2138307,
#2137603, and #2138296. The SBI++ model training
was run on the FASRC Cannon cluster supported by the
FAS Division of Science Research Computing Group at
Harvard University.
The Legacy Surveys consist of three individual and
complementary projects: the Dark Energy Camera
Legacy Survey (DECaLS; Proposal ID #2014B-0404;
PIs: David Schlegel and Arjun Dey), the BeijingArizona Sky Survey (BASS; NOAO Prop. ID #2015A0801; PIs: Zhou Xu and Xiaohui Fan), and the Mayall
z-band Legacy Survey (MzLS; Prop. ID #2016A-0453;
PI: Arjun Dey). DECaLS, BASS and MzLS together
include data obtained, respectively, at the Blanco telescope, Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory, NSF’s
NOIRLab; the Bok telescope, Steward Observatory,
University of Arizona; and the Mayall telescope, Kitt
Peak National Observatory, NOIRLab. Pipeline processing and analyses of the data were supported by
NOIRLab and the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL). The Legacy Surveys project is honored
to be permitted to conduct astronomical research on
Iolkam Du’ag (Kitt Peak), a mountain with particular
significance to the Tohono O’odham Nation.
This project used data obtained with the Dark Energy Camera (DECam), which was constructed by the
Dark Energy Survey (DES) collaboration. Funding for
the DES Projects has been provided by the U.S. Department of Energy, the U.S. National Science Foundation, the Ministry of Science and Education of Spain,
the Science and Technology Facilities Council of the
United Kingdom, the Higher Education Funding Council for England, the National Center for Supercomputing Applications at the University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, the Kavli Institute of Cosmological Physics
at the University of Chicago, Center for Cosmology
and Astro-Particle Physics at the Ohio State University, the Mitchell Institute for Fundamental Physics and
Astronomy at Texas A&M University, Financiadora de
Estudos e Projetos, Fundacao Carlos Chagas Filho de
Amparo, Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos, Fundacao Carlos Chagas Filho de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico and the Ministerio da Ciencia, Tecnologia e Inovacao, the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft and the Collaborating Institutions in the Dark Energy Survey. The Collaborat-

19
ing Institutions are Argonne National Laboratory, the
University of California at Santa Cruz, the University
of Cambridge, Centro de Investigaciones Energeticas,
Medioambientales y Tecnologicas-Madrid, the University of Chicago, University College London, the DESBrazil Consortium, the University of Edinburgh, the
Eidgenossische Technische Hochschule (ETH) Zurich,
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, the University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, the Institut de Ciencies de l’Espai (IEEC/CSIC), the Institut de Fisica
d’Altes Energies, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, the Ludwig Maximilians Universitat Munchen and
the associated Excellence Cluster Universe, the University of Michigan, NSF’s NOIRLab, the University of
Nottingham, the Ohio State University, the University
of Pennsylvania, the University of Portsmouth, SLAC
National Accelerator Laboratory, Stanford University,
the University of Sussex, and Texas A&M University.
The Pan-STARRS1 Surveys (PS1) and the PS1 public
science archive have been made possible through contributions by the Institute for Astronomy, the University
of Hawaii, the Pan-STARRS Project Office, the MaxPlanck Society and its participating institutes, the Max
Planck Institute for Astronomy, Heidelberg and the Max
Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics, Garching,
The Johns Hopkins University, Durham University, the
University of Edinburgh, the Queen’s University Belfast,
the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, the
Las Cumbres Observatory Global Telescope Network
Incorporated, the National Central University of Taiwan, the Space Telescope Science Institute, the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration under Grant No.
NNX08AR22G issued through the Planetary Science Division of the NASA Science Mission Directorate, the
National Science Foundation Grant No. AST–1238877,
the University of Maryland, Eotvos Lorand University
(ELTE), the Los Alamos National Laboratory, and the
Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation.
Funding for the Sloan Digital Sky Survey IV has been
provided by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the U.S.
Department of Energy Office of Science, and the Participating Institutions. SDSS acknowledges support and
resources from the Center for High-Performance Computing at the University of Utah. The SDSS web site is
www.sdss4.org.
SDSS is managed by the Astrophysical Research
Consortium for the Participating Institutions of the
SDSS Collaboration including the Brazilian Participation Group, the Carnegie Institution for Science,
Carnegie Mellon University, Center for Astrophysics —
Harvard & Smithsonian (CfA), the Chilean Participation Group, the French Participation Group, Instituto

20
de Astrofı́sica de Canarias, The Johns Hopkins University, Kavli Institute for the Physics and Mathematics
of the Universe (IPMU) / University of Tokyo, the Korean Participation Group, Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, Leibniz Institut für Astrophysik Potsdam
(AIP), Max-Planck-Institut für Astronomie (MPIA Heidelberg), Max-Planck-Institut für Astrophysik (MPA
Garching), Max-Planck-Institut für Extraterrestrische
Physik (MPE), National Astronomical Observatories of
China, New Mexico State University, New York University, University of Notre Dame, Observatório Nacional / MCTI, The Ohio State University, Pennsylvania State University, Shanghai Astronomical Observatory, United Kingdom Participation Group, Universidad
Nacional Autónoma de México, University of Arizona,
University of Colorado Boulder, University of Oxford,
University of Portsmouth, University of Utah, University of Virginia, University of Washington, University of
Wisconsin, Vanderbilt University, and Yale University.

This publication makes use of data products from the
Two Micron All Sky Survey, which is a joint project
of the University of Massachusetts and the Infrared
Processing and Analysis Center/California Institute of
Technology, funded by the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration and the National Science Foundation.
This publication makes use of data products from the
Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer, which is a joint
project of the University of California, Los Angeles, and
the Jet Propulsion Laboratory/California Institute of
Technology, funded by the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration.

Software: NumPy (Harris et al. 2020), Bokeh
(Bokeh Development Team 2018), Astropy (Astropy
Collaboration et al. 2013, 2018), Django (Django Software Foundation 2018), GHOST (Gagliano et al. 2021),
MySQL (https://www.mysql.com/, Docker (Merkel
2014), Sphinx (Brandl 2021)

APPENDIX

A. PROSPECTOR-α PRIORS

In this section, we list the priors used to generate simulated galaxies for the training of SBI++. Two thirds of our
simulated galaxies use the priors in Table 1, while the remaining third uses the same parameter ranges but with flat
priors across those ranges. For the 2 kpc local regions, the allowed mass range is 5.5 to 11 dex, while all other priors
remain the same. For additional details on the implementation of the Prospector-α model in SBI++, see Wang et al.
(2023a).
B. VALIDATION OF SED PARAMETERS

This appendix contains several figures comparing Blast’s SED-fitting parameter estimation to those from other
publications and methodologies. Figure 15 shows stellar mass, Figure 16 shows sSFR, Figure 17 shows stellar mass
and sSFR compared to inferences from WISE IR data, and Figure 18 shows comparisons to stellar metallicity and
dust power-law index using the small sample from Ramsden et al. (2022).

21

blast
Table 1. Priors on the distribution of Prospector-α parameters
Variablea
log(M∗ /M⊙ )
log(Z∗ /Z⊙ )
log(Zgas /Z⊙ )
SFH
τdust,2
n
τdust,1 /τdust,2
log(fagn )
log(τagn )
qpah
Umin
log(γe )
a

Prior

Range

flat
Gallazzi et al. (2005)b
flat
t(µ = 0, σ = 5, ν = 2)c
N (µ = 0.3, σ = 1.0)
flat
N (µ = 1.0, σ = 0.3)
flat
flat
N (µ = 2.0, σ = 2.0)
N (µ = 1.0, σ = 10.0)
N (µ = −2.0, σ = 1.0)

7, 12.5
−1.98, 0.19
−2, 0.5
−5, 5
0, 4
−1, 0.4
0, 2
−5, 0.48
0.70, 2.18
0, 7
0.1, 25
−4, 0

We use the same variables and notation as Wang et al.
(2023b, their Table 1), with the addition of two variables:
Umin , the minimum intensity of stellar radiation that dust
grains are exposed to, and log(γe ), the fraction of dust
mass exposed to at least this minimum intensity. All logarithms use base 10.
b
Priors are Gaussian with mean and standard deviation
based on the mass-dependent metallicity distribution from
Gallazzi et al. (2005).
c
Student’s t-distribution. For details on the adopted age
bins, see Wang et al. (2023a), their Section 3.3.

22

Figure 15. SED parameter comparisons using Jones et al. (2018)-selected SNe for global (left) and local (right) galaxy
properties. Local properties from Blast are reduced by 0.25 dex due to the approximate difference in aperture area between
this work and J18 (2 kpc versus 1.5 kpc), which is likely responsible for the systematic offsets at the low-mass end.

Figure 16. Global sSFR parameter comparisons between Blast and LePHARE ugrizy-derived quantities from Jones et al.
(2018). Agreement is good overall, but Blast prefers lower sSFR for the most extreme star-forming objects in the sample.

blast

23

Figure 17. Comparison between Blast and quantities derived from the WISE infrared bands following Jarrett et al. (2023).
Mass agrees closely (a median difference of just 0.06 dex), while Blast reports slightly lower sSFR by 0.38 dex on average.

Figure 18. Comparison between Ramsden et al. (2022) and Blast, for two of the more uncertain Prospector-α parameters:
the stellar metallicity, log10 (Z∗ /Z⊙ ), and the dust power-law index, n. Agreeement is typically within the errors, and there is
a median offset of 0.05 dex for stellar metallicity and ∼0.1 for the dust optical depth. Inspection of individual outliers shows
slightly different photometry and photometric bands included in the fit.

24
REFERENCES
Abbott, T. M. C., Allam, S., Andersen, P., et al. 2019,
ApJL, 872, L30, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab04fa
Ahumada, R., Allende Prieto, C., Almeida, A., et al. 2020,
ApJS, 249, 3, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ab929e
Aleo, P. D., Malanchev, K., Sharief, S., et al. 2022, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2211.07128,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2211.07128
Alsing, J., Thorp, S., Deger, S., et al. 2024, ApJS, 274, 12,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ad5c69
Alsing, J., Peiris, H., Leja, J., et al. 2020, ApJS, 249, 5,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ab917f
Anderson, J. P., Habergham, S. M., James, P. A., &
Hamuy, M. 2012, MNRAS, 424, 1372,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.21324.x
Anderson, J. P., James, P. A., Habergham, S. M., Galbany,
L., & Kuncarayakti, H. 2015, PASA, 32, e019,
doi: 10.1017/pasa.2015.19
Arnouts, S., & Ilbert, O. 2011, LePHARE: Photometric
Analysis for Redshift Estimate, Astrophysics Source
Code Library, record ascl:1108.009
Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J.,
et al. 2013, A&A, 558, A33,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201322068
Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Sipőcz, B. M.,
et al. 2018, AJ, 156, 123, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aabc4f
Bellm, E. C., Kulkarni, S. R., Graham, M. J., et al. 2019,
PASP, 131, 018002, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aaecbe
Blanton, M. R., Bershady, M. A., Abolfathi, B., et al. 2017,
AJ, 154, 28, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aa7567
Boerner, T. J., Deems, S., Furlani, T. R., Knuth, S. L., &
Towns, J. 2023, in Practice and Experience in Advanced
Research Computing 2023: Computing for the Common
Good, PEARC ’23 (New York, NY, USA: Association for
Computing Machinery), 173–176,
doi: 10.1145/3569951.3597559
Bokeh Development Team. 2018, Bokeh: Python library for
interactive visualization.
https://bokeh.pydata.org/en/latest/
Boone, K. 2019, AJ, 158, 257,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab5182
Boruah, S. S., Hudson, M. J., & Lavaux, G. 2020, MNRAS,
498, 2703, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa2485
Bradley, L., Sipőcz, B., Robitaille, T., et al. 2022,
astropy/photutils:, 1.4.0, Zenodo, Zenodo,
doi: 10.5281/zenodo.596036
Brandl, G. 2021, URL http://sphinx-doc. org/sphinx. pdf
Brennan, S. J., Schulze, S., Lunnan, R., et al. 2023, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2312.13280,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2312.13280

Brout, D., & Scolnic, D. 2021, ApJ, 909, 26,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abd69b
Brout, D., Scolnic, D., Popovic, B., et al. 2022, ApJ, 938,
110, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac8e04
Brown, T. M., Baliber, N., Bianco, F. B., et al. 2013,
PASP, 125, 1031, doi: 10.1086/673168
Bruzual, G., & Charlot, S. 2003, MNRAS, 344, 1000,
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2003.06897.x
Byler, N., Dalcanton, J. J., Conroy, C., & Johnson, B. D.
2017, ApJ, 840, 44, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa6c66
Calzetti, D., Armus, L., Bohlin, R. C., et al. 2000, ApJ,
533, 682, doi: 10.1086/308692
Chambers, K. C., Magnier, E. A., Metcalfe, N., et al.
2016a, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1612.05560,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1612.05560
—. 2016b, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1612.05560,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1612.05560
Charlot, S., & Fall, S. M. 2000, ApJ, 539, 718,
doi: 10.1086/309250
Choi, J., Dotter, A., Conroy, C., et al. 2016, ApJ, 823, 102,
doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/823/2/102
Conroy, C., & Gunn, J. E. 2010a, FSPS: Flexible Stellar
Population Synthesis, Astrophysics Source Code Library,
record ascl:1010.043. http://ascl.net/1010.043
—. 2010b, ApJ, 712, 833,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/712/2/833
Conroy, C., Gunn, J. E., & White, M. 2009, ApJ, 699, 486,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/699/1/486
Coulter, D. A., Jones, D. O., McGill, P., et al. 2022,
YSE-PZ: An Open-source Target and Observation
Management System, v0.3.0, Zenodo, Zenodo,
doi: 10.5281/zenodo.7278430
—. 2023, PASP, 135, 064501,
doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/acd662
Dálya, G., Dı́az, R., Bouchet, F. R., et al. 2022, MNRAS,
514, 1403, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac1443
Dey, A., Schlegel, D. J., Lang, D., et al. 2019, AJ, 157, 168,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab089d
Dixon, M., Mould, J., Lidman, C., et al. 2024, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2408.01001,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2408.01001
Django REST Framework. 2024, Django REST Framework,
3.15. https://www.django-rest-framework.org/
Django Software Foundation. 2018, Django, 2.2.
https://djangoproject.com
Dotter, A. 2016, ApJS, 222, 8,
doi: 10.3847/0067-0049/222/1/8
Draine, B. T., & Li, A. 2007, ApJ, 657, 810,
doi: 10.1086/511055

25

blast
Drout, M. R., Chornock, R., Soderberg, A. M., et al. 2014,
ApJ, 794, 23, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/794/1/23

Hodgkin, S. T., Harrison, D. L., Breedt, E., et al. 2021,
A&A, 652, A76, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202140735

Duane, S., Kennedy, A. D., Pendleton, B. J., & Roweth, D.
1987, Physics Letters B, 195, 216,
doi: 10.1016/0370-2693(87)91197-X

Hoffman, M. D., & Gelman, A. 2011, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1111.4246, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1111.4246

Duarte, J., González-Gaitán, S., Mourão, A., et al. 2023,
A&A, 680, A56, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202346534
Fitzpatrick, M. J., Olsen, K., Economou, F., et al. 2014, in
Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers
(SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 9149, Observatory
Operations: Strategies, Processes, and Systems V, ed.
A. B. Peck, C. R. Benn, & R. L. Seaman, 91491T,
doi: 10.1117/12.2057445
Flewelling, H. A., Magnier, E. A., Chambers, K. C., et al.
2020, ApJS, 251, 7, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/abb82d
Foley, R. J., & Mandel, K. 2013, ApJ, 778, 167,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/778/2/167
Förster, F., Cabrera-Vives, G., Castillo-Navarrete, E., et al.
2021, AJ, 161, 242, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abe9bc
Freedman, W. L., Madore, B. F., Hatt, D., et al. 2019, ApJ,
882, 34, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab2f73
Gagliano, A., Contardo, G., Foreman-Mackey, D., Malz,
A. I., & Aleo, P. D. 2023, ApJ, 954, 6,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ace326
Gagliano, A., Narayan, G., Engel, A., Carrasco Kind, M., &
LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration. 2021, ApJ,
908, 170, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abd02b
Gallazzi, A., Charlot, S., Brinchmann, J., White, S. D. M.,
& Tremonti, C. A. 2005, MNRAS, 362, 41,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2005.09321.x
Ginsburg, A., Sipőcz, B. M., Brasseur, C. E., et al. 2019,
AJ, 157, 98, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aafc33

Hosseinzadeh, G., McCully, C., Zabludoff, A. I., et al. 2019,
ApJL, 871, L9, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aafc61
Howell, D. A., & Global Supernova Project. 2017, in
American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts, Vol.
230, American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts
#230, 318.03
Huber, M., Carter Chambers, K., Flewelling, H., et al.
2015, in IAU General Assembly, Vol. 29, 2258303
Jacobson-Galán, W. V., Dessart, L., Jones, D. O., et al.
2022, ApJ, 924, 15, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac3f3a
Jarrett, T. H., Cluver, M. E., Brown, M. J. I., et al. 2019,
ApJS, 245, 25, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ab521a
Jarrett, T. H., Cluver, M. E., Taylor, E. N., et al. 2023,
ApJ, 946, 95, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acb68f
Johnson, B. D., Leja, J., Conroy, C., & Speagle, J. S. 2021,
ApJS, 254, 22, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/abef67
Jones, D. O., Riess, A. G., Scolnic, D. M., et al. 2018, ApJ,
867, 108, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aae2b9
Jones, D. O., Scolnic, D. M., Foley, R. J., et al. 2019, ApJ,
881, 19, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab2bec
Jones, D. O., Foley, R. J., Narayan, G., et al. 2021, ApJ,
908, 143, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abd7f5
Karamanis, M., Beutler, F., Peacock, J. A., Nabergoj, D.,
& Seljak, U. 2022, MNRAS, 516, 1644,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac2272
Kasliwal, M. M., Cannella, C., Bagdasaryan, A., et al.
2019, PASP, 131, 038003, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aafbc2

Grayling, M., Thorp, S., Mandel, K. S., et al. 2024,
MNRAS, 531, 953, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae1202

Kelly, P. L., Hicken, M., Burke, D. L., Mandel, K. S., &
Kirshner, R. P. 2010, ApJ, 715, 743,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/715/2/743

Green, G. 2018, The Journal of Open Source Software, 3,
695, doi: 10.21105/joss.00695

Kilpatrick, C. D., Drout, M. R., Auchettl, K., et al. 2021,
MNRAS, 504, 2073, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab838

Greenberg, D. S., Nonnenmacher, M., & Macke, J. H. 2019,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1905.07488,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1905.07488

Kim, Y. L., Briday, M., Copin, Y., et al. 2024, MNRAS,
527, 4359, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad3501

Gupta, R. R., Kuhlmann, S., Kovacs, E., et al. 2016, AJ,
152, 154, doi: 10.3847/0004-6256/152/6/154
Hahn, C., Kwon, K. J., Tojeiro, R., et al. 2023, ApJ, 945,
16, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac8983

Kisley, M., Qin, Y.-J., Zabludoff, A., Barnard, K., & Ko,
C.-L. 2023, ApJ, 942, 29, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aca532
Kochanek, C. S., Shappee, B. J., Stanek, K. Z., et al. 2017,
PASP, 129, 104502, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aa80d9
Kron, R. G. 1980, ApJS, 43, 305, doi: 10.1086/190669

Hand, J., Liu, S., Galbany, L., et al. 2022, ApJ, 925, 115,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac389f

Lampeitl, H., Smith, M., Nichol, R. C., et al. 2010, ApJ,
722, 566, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/722/1/566

Harris, C. R., Millman, K. J., van der Walt, S. J., et al.
2020, Nature, 585, 357, doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2

Lang, D., Hogg, D. W., & Schlegel, D. J. 2016, AJ, 151, 36,
doi: 10.3847/0004-6256/151/2/36

Ho, A. Y. Q., Perley, D. A., Kulkarni, S. R., et al. 2020,
ApJ, 895, 49, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab8bcf

Le Borgne, D., & Rocca-Volmerange, B. 2002, A&A, 386,
446, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20020259

26
Leaman, J., Li, W., Chornock, R., & Filippenko, A. V.
2011, MNRAS, 412, 1419,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.18158.x
Leja, J., Carnall, A. C., Johnson, B. D., Conroy, C., &
Speagle, J. S. 2019a, ApJ, 876, 3,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab133c
—. 2019b, ApJ, 876, 3, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab133c
Leja, J., Johnson, B. D., Conroy, C., & van Dokkum, P.
2018, ApJ, 854, 62, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaa8db
Leja, J., Johnson, B. D., Conroy, C., van Dokkum, P. G., &
Byler, N. 2017, ApJ, 837, 170,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa5ffe
Leroy, A. K., Sandstrom, K. M., Lang, D., et al. 2019,
ApJS, 244, 24, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ab3925
Li, W., Leaman, J., Chornock, R., et al. 2011, MNRAS,
412, 1441, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.18160.x
Lokken, M., Gagliano, A., Narayan, G., et al. 2023,
MNRAS, 520, 2887, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad302
Lower, S., Narayanan, D., Leja, J., et al. 2020, ApJ, 904,
33, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abbfa7
—. 2022, ApJ, 931, 14, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac6959
LSST Science Collaboration, Abell, P. A., Allison, J., et al.
2009, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:0912.0201,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.0912.0201
Lunnan, R., Chornock, R., Berger, E., et al. 2015, ApJ,
804, 90, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/804/2/90
Magnier, E. A., Schlafly, E. F., Finkbeiner, D. P., et al.
2020, ApJS, 251, 6, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/abb82a
Malanchev, K., Kornilov, M. V., Pruzhinskaya, M. V., et al.
2023, PASP, 135, 024503, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/acb292
Martin, D. C., Fanson, J., Schiminovich, D., et al. 2005,
ApJL, 619, L1, doi: 10.1086/426387
Matheson, T., Stubens, C., Wolf, N., et al. 2021, AJ, 161,
107, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abd703
Mathews, E. P., Leja, J., Speagle, J. S., et al. 2023, ApJ,
954, 132, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ace720
Meldorf, C., Palmese, A., Brout, D., et al. 2023, MNRAS,
518, 1985, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac3056
Merkel, D. 2014, Linux journal, 2014, 2
Modjaz, M., Bianco, F. B., Siwek, M., et al. 2020, ApJ,
892, 153, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab4185
Möller, A., Peloton, J., Ishida, E. E. O., et al. 2021,
MNRAS, 501, 3272, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa3602
Möller, A., Wiseman, P., Smith, M., et al. 2024, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2402.18690,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2402.18690
Moreno-Raya, M. E., Mollá, M., López-Sánchez, Á. R.,
et al. 2016, ApJL, 818, L19,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8205/818/1/L19

Müller-Bravo, T., & Galbany, L. 2022, The Journal of
Open Source Software, 7, 4508, doi: 10.21105/joss.04508
Muthukrishna, D., Narayan, G., Mandel, K. S., Biswas, R.,
& Hložek, R. 2019, PASP, 131, 118002,
doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ab1609
Nagaraj, G., Forbes, J. C., Leja, J., Foreman-Mackey, D.,
& Hayward, C. C. 2022, ApJ, 932, 54,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac6c80
Nenkova, M., Sirocky, M. M., Ivezić, Ž., & Elitzur, M.
2008, ApJ, 685, 147, doi: 10.1086/590482
Nikutta, R., Fitzpatrick, M., Scott, A., & Weaver, B. A.
2020, Astronomy and Computing, 33, 100411,
doi: 10.1016/j.ascom.2020.100411
Noll, S., Burgarella, D., Giovannoli, E., et al. 2009, A&A,
507, 1793, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/200912497
Nordin, J., Brinnel, V., van Santen, J., et al. 2019, A&A,
631, A147, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201935634
Onken, C. A., Wolf, C., Bessell, M. S., et al. 2024, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2402.02015,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2402.02015
Papamakarios, G., Pavlakou, T., & Murray, I. 2017, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:1705.07057,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1705.07057
Perley, D. A., Quimby, R. M., Yan, L., et al. 2016a, ApJ,
830, 13, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/830/1/13
Perley, D. A., Tanvir, N. R., Hjorth, J., et al. 2016b, ApJ,
817, 8, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/817/1/8
Pessi, P. J., Durgesh, R., Nakazono, L., et al. 2024, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2404.18165,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2404.18165
Peterson, E. R., Scolnic, D., Jones, D. O., et al. 2024, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2403.13885,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2403.13885
Planck Collaboration, Aghanim, N., Akrami, Y., et al.
2020, A&A, 641, A6, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201833910
Popovic, B., Wiseman, P., Sullivan, M., et al. 2024, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2406.05051,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2406.05051
Qin, Y.-J., & Zabludoff, A. 2024, MNRAS, 533, 3517,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae1921
Qin, Y.-J., Zabludoff, A., Arcavi, I., et al. 2024, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2409.13804.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.13804
Qin, Y.-J., Zabludoff, A., Kisley, M., et al. 2022, ApJS,
259, 13, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ac2fa1
Qu, H., & Sako, M. 2022, AJ, 163, 57,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac39a1
Ramsden, P., Lanning, D., Nicholl, M., & McGee, S. L.
2022, MNRAS, 515, 1146, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac1810

27

blast
Riess, A. G., Yuan, W., Macri, L. M., et al. 2022, ApJL,
934, L7, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac5c5b
Rigault, M., Copin, Y., Aldering, G., et al. 2013, A&A,
560, A66, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201322104
Saha, A., Matheson, T., Snodgrass, R., et al. 2014, in
Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers
(SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 9149, Observatory
Operations: Strategies, Processes, and Systems V, ed.
A. B. Peck, C. R. Benn, & R. L. Seaman, 914908,
doi: 10.1117/12.2056988
Salim, S., Lee, J. C., Janowiecki, S., et al. 2016, ApJS, 227,
2, doi: 10.3847/0067-0049/227/1/2
Sánchez-Blázquez, P., Peletier, R. F., Jiménez-Vicente, J.,
et al. 2006, MNRAS, 371, 703,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2006.10699.x
Sánchez-Sáez, P., Reyes, I., Valenzuela, C., et al. 2021, AJ,
161, 141, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abd5c1
Sanders, N. E., Soderberg, A. M., Levesque, E. M., et al.
2012, ApJ, 758, 132, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/758/2/132
Schlafly, E. F., & Finkbeiner, D. P. 2011, ApJ, 737, 103,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/737/2/103
Scolnic, D. M., Jones, D. O., Rest, A., et al. 2018, ApJ,
859, 101, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aab9bb
Shappee, B. J., Prieto, J. L., Grupe, D., et al. 2014, ApJ,
788, 48, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/788/1/48
Skrutskie, M. F., Cutri, R. M., Stiening, R., et al. 2006, AJ,
131, 1163, doi: 10.1086/498708
Smartt, S. J., Valenti, S., Fraser, M., et al. 2015, A&A, 579,
A40, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201425237
Smith, K. W., Williams, R. D., Young, D. R., et al. 2019,
Research Notes of the American Astronomical Society, 3,
26, doi: 10.3847/2515-5172/ab020f
Smith, K. W., Smartt, S. J., Young, D. R., et al. 2020,
PASP, 132, 085002, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ab936e
Smith, N., Li, W., Filippenko, A. V., & Chornock, R. 2011,
MNRAS, 412, 1522,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.17229.x
Speagle, J. S. 2020, MNRAS, 493, 3132,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa278
Stahl, B. E., de Jaeger, T., Boruah, S. S., et al. 2021,
MNRAS, 505, 2349, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab1446
Street, R. A., Bowman, M., Saunders, E. S., & Boroson, T.
2018, in Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 10707, Software
and Cyberinfrastructure for Astronomy V, ed. J. C.
Guzman & J. Ibsen, 1070711, doi: 10.1117/12.2312293
Sullivan, M., Conley, A., Howell, D. A., et al. 2010,
MNRAS, 406, 782, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2010.16731.x
Taggart, K., & Perley, D. A. 2021, MNRAS, 503, 3931,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab174

Taylor, E. N., Hopkins, A. M., Baldry, I. K., et al. 2011,
MNRAS, 418, 1587,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.19536.x
Tejero-Cantero, A., Boelts, J., Deistler, M., et al. 2020, The
Journal of Open Source Software, 5, 2505,
doi: 10.21105/joss.02505
Thorp, S., Alsing, J., Peiris, H. V., et al. 2024, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2406.19437,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2406.19437
Timmes, F. X., Brown, E. F., & Truran, J. W. 2003, ApJL,
590, L83, doi: 10.1086/376721
Tinyanont, S., Ridden-Harper, R., Foley, R. J., et al. 2022,
MNRAS, 512, 2777, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab2887
Tonry, J. L., Denneau, L., Heinze, A. N., et al. 2018, PASP,
130, 064505, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aabadf
Tsapras, Y., Street, R., Horne, K., et al. 2009,
Astronomische Nachrichten, 330, 4,
doi: 10.1002/asna.200811130
Vincenzi, M., Brout, D., Armstrong, P., et al. 2024, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2401.02945,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2401.02945
Wang, B., Leja, J., Villar, V. A., & Speagle, J. S. 2023a,
ApJL, 952, L10, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ace361
Wang, B., Leja, J., Bezanson, R., et al. 2023b, ApJL, 944,
L58, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/acba99
Wang, B., Leja, J., Labbé, I., et al. 2024, ApJS, 270, 12,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ad0846
Wenger, M., Ochsenbein, F., Egret, D., et al. 2000, A&AS,
143, 9, doi: 10.1051/aas:2000332
Wiseman, P., Sullivan, M., Smith, M., & Popovic, B. 2023,
MNRAS, 520, 6214, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad488
Wiseman, P., Pursiainen, M., Childress, M., et al. 2020a,
MNRAS, 498, 2575, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa2474
Wiseman, P., Smith, M., Childress, M., et al. 2020b,
MNRAS, 495, 4040, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa1302
Wong, K. W. K., Gabrié, M., & Foreman-Mackey, D. 2023,
The Journal of Open Source Software, 8, 5021,
doi: 10.21105/joss.05021
Wright, E. L., Eisenhardt, P. R. M., Mainzer, A. K., et al.
2010, AJ, 140, 1868, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/140/6/1868
Ye, C., Jones, D. O., Hoogendam, W. B., et al. 2024, ApJ,
974, 164, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad6c3d
Yoon, S.-C. 2015, PASA, 32, e015,
doi: 10.1017/pasa.2015.16
York, D. G., Adelman, J., Anderson, John E., J., et al.
2000, AJ, 120, 1579, doi: 10.1086/301513

