Draft version January 14, 2021
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX63

GHOST: Using Only Host Galaxy Information to Accurately Associate and Distinguish Supernovae
Alex Gagliano,1, 2, 3, 4 Gautham Narayan,1, 2, 3 Andrew Engel1 And Matias Carrasco Kind1, 2, 3

arXiv:2008.09630v4 [astro-ph.GA] 13 Jan 2021

(The LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration)

1 Department of Astronomy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
2 National Center for Supercomputing Applications, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
3 Center for Astrophysical Surveys, Urbana, IL, 61801, USA
4 NSF Graduate Research Fellow

ABSTRACT
We present GHOST, a database of 16, 175 spectroscopically classified supernovae and the properties
of their host galaxies. We have constructed GHOST using a novel host galaxy association method that
employs deep postage stamps of the field surrounding a transient. Our gradient ascent method achieves
fewer misassociations for low-z hosts and higher completeness for high-z hosts than previous methods.
Using dimensionality reduction, we identify the host galaxy properties that distinguish supernova
classes. Our results suggest that the host galaxies of SLSNe, SNe Ia, and core-collapse supernovae can
be separated by brightness and derived extendedness measures. Next, we train a random forest model
to predict supernova class using only host galaxy information and the radial offset of the supernova. We
can distinguish SNe Ia and core-collapse supernovae with ∼ 70% accuracy without any photometric or
spectroscopic data from the event itself. Vera C. Rubin Observatory will usher in a new era of transient
population studies, demanding improved photometric tools for rapid identification and classification
of transient events. By identifying the host features with high discriminatory power, we will maintain
SN sample purities and continue to identify scientifically relevant events as data volumes increase. The
GHOST database and our corresponding software for associating transients with host galaxies are both
publicly available through the astro ghost package.
Keywords: cosmology: observations, supernovae, machine learning, random forests
1. INTRODUCTION

In wide-fast-deep mode, Vera C. Rubin Observatory’s
(Rubin Observatory; Ivezić et al. 2019) Legacy Survey
for Space and Time (LSST) will image the entire Southern sky every ∼ 4 nights. Much of this data will be rich
in transient activity, with a predicted annual detection
rate of 20,000 luminous (Mv < −16) supernovae (LSST
Science Collaboration et al. 2009). Type Ia supernovae
(SNe Ia) will be especially valuable discoveries, as their
standardizability make them ideal for measuring cosmological distances and tracing the expansion history of the
Universe. Since their initial use in discovering the accelerated expansion of the universe (Riess et al. 1998; Perlmutter et al. 1999), SN Ia samples have placed strong
Corresponding author: Alex Gagliano
gaglian2@illinois.edu

constraints on both the dark energy equation of state
(parameterized by w) and its potential evolution with
redshift (Scolnic et al. 2018; Jones et al. 2018a).
LSST will discover supernovae photometrically, challenging our ability to maintain pure SNe Ia samples.
Contamination from Ib and Ic core-collapse supernovae,
whose light curves closely resemble those of SNe Ia, can
systematically bias derived estimates for w toward a
time-evolving dark energy equation of state (Falck et al.
2010). A select few supernovae discovered by LSST will
be prioritized for rapid follow-up on smaller telescopes,
where high-cadence spectroscopy can aid in classification and progenitor studies, but we will need accurate
photometric classification to first identify this scientifically valuable subset.
To address this issue, a significant amount of effort
has been devoted to developing accurate photometric
classification algorithms. These classifiers primarily em-

2
ploy template fitting methods on real or simulated light
curves (e.g. Poznanski et al. 2007; Karpenka et al.
2013), novel machine learning algorithms (Ishida & de
Souza 2013; Kimura et al. 2017; Muthukrishna et al.
2019; Möller & de Boissière 2020), or a combination of
the two (Lochner et al. 2016). Community-wide challenges have also drawn upon expertise from outside of
the astronomical community, starting with the Supernova Photometric Classification Challenge (SNPhotCC;
Kessler et al. 2010) in preparation for the Dark Energy
Survey (DES) and closely followed by the Photometric LSST Astronomical Time-Series Classification Challenge (PLAsTiCC; Kessler et al. 2019) in preparation
for LSST. Despite the accuracy of these previously developed methods, many classifiers are trained and tested
on archival photometry spanning the full phase of previously discovered events; during LSST operations, however, the massive data volumes will require us to operate algorithms in real time and on incomplete light
curves. This has led to the creation of brokers, automated systems that will rapidly ingest and process
alerts from a variety of synoptic surveys such as LSST
(e.g ANTARES, Narayan et al. 2018; LASAIR, Smith
et al. 2019). Marshals, platforms for automated coordination of telescope follow-up, are a valuable counterpart
to these brokers. Marshals have existed for over a decade
(Law et al. 2009), but their scope has expanded significantly in recent years to meet the growing discovery
rate of events (Kasliwal et al. 2019). Marshals will soon
operate in real-time and with automatic target selection
(e.g. Sravan et al. 2020). Once brokers have reduced
the stream of alerts and marshals have prioritized targets for observation, these objects are sent to Target
and Observation Managers (TOMs; Street et al. 2018)
for scheduling. This suite of software tools will be critical for streamlining communication between sites and
reducing the latency for obtaining new observations.
Real-time photometric classification will be necessary
not only for maintaining pure SN Ia samples, but also
for studying the progenitor physics of rare phenomena
in detail (e.g. De et al. 2019; Hosseinzadeh et al. 2017;
Jiang et al. 2017; Miller et al. 2020; among others). Several SNe Ia discovered at early times, including 2018oh
(Dimitriadis et al. 2019; Shappee et al. 2019), have revealed flux excesses in the first few days after explosion, providing a valuable probe of shock interactions
with a companion star and with the circumstellar environment. Fast-evolving luminous transients (FELTs)
represent an additional class of novel events with light
curve rise times as short as 2.2 days (for KSN2015K;
Rest et al. 2018), and the number of fast transients discovered continues to be grow (Poznanski et al. 2010;

Prentice et al. 2018; Tampo et al. 2020). Rubin Observatory will continue to push our explored parameter
space to brighter cataclysmic events occurring across
even shorter (< 1 day) timescales. Rapid identification of the events within this parameter space will be
critical for accurately characterizing their evolution and
constraining progenitor models. In an effort to bridge
this gap, a series of real-time classifiers are now being developed that leverage Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs). These networks modify the weights from previous layers as data is added, allowing event classifications to update dynamically while targets are still being observed. These methods have achieved high accuracies distinguishing between supernovae using photometry pre-maximum (95%, Muthukrishna et al. 2019;
83%, Möller & de Boissière 2020), and RNNs trained
directly on postage stamps have also shown promise
for distinguishing a diverse range of transient and nontransient sources with limited phase coverage (CarrascoDavis et al. 2019). Despite these early successes, the
current generation of real-time classifiers are trained on
simulated data. This makes them sensitive to shot noise
and additional artifacts in real photometric measurements at early times. Further, although LSST will image
the entire sky every 4 nights in wide-fast-deep mode,
each sweep will be done in a single passband. As a
result, revisits using the same passband are spaced between 10–20 nights in grizy, with even larger gaps in
u. This presents a challenge for constraining the shape
and color evolution of light curves of individual events,
information upon which most classifiers depend.
By decreasing the dependence on early and sparse
photometry, host galaxy information can help mitigate
these issues. Supernova classes have been known to
occur at different rates within different morphological
classes of galaxies for decades, beginning with the association of type I supernovae with I0 galaxies (Oemler & Tinsley 1979). More recently, statistical studies
undertaken by Foley & Mandel (2013) and Hakobyan
et al. (2014) found that type Ia supernovae occur more
frequently in early-type, red galaxies with low star
formation rates than in late-type, blue galaxies with
high star formation rates. In addition, Kelly & Kirshner (2012) suggest that stripped-envelope SNe Ib/c
are found mainly in metal-poor galaxies, and early-type
galaxies hosting SNe II/Ib are on average bluer than
early-type galaxies hosting SNe Ia (Suh et al. 2011).
Correlations have also been identified between supernova type and both host galaxy morphology (Foley &
Mandel 2013) and global star formation rate (Kelly et al.
2014; Zhou et al. 2019).

3
Supernova classifiers can directly benefit from these
host galaxy correlations. Foley & Mandel (2013) found
that a Naive Bayes classifier using only host galaxy morphology, absolute magnitude, color, galactic offset and
pixel rank could classify supernovae as accurately as
the best light curve classification methods of that time.
More recently, Baldeschi et al. (2020) showed that photometric estimates of host galaxy star formation can be
used to increase the purity of SN Ia and core-collapse supernova samples by 10% and 20% from random guessing,
respectively. We extend these previous efforts by considering an exhaustive list of photometric host galaxy
properties and a sample of host galaxies greater than an
order of magnitude larger than previous studies. The
single-visit depth of LSST (r ∼ 24.5 mag) will allow us
to identify transient host galaxies out to redshift ∼1,
and we can use the photometry of these galaxies as a
priori data to improve early-time classification.
A comprehensive understanding of the dominant correlations linking a transient to its host galaxy will
improve our ability to reduce systematic uncertainties
within SN Ia data. SN Ia explosions are known to
be influenced by their host environments, as metallicity
(Höflich et al. 2010) and extinction from dust (Mandel
et al. 2017) can change the shape and peak magnitude of
the resultant light curve, respectively. Moreover, many
groups have identified correlations between SN Ia Hubble Residuals and global properties of the host galaxy.
These correlations include morphology (Hamuy et al.
1996), metallicity (D’Andrea et al. 2011), and star formation rate derived from ground-based SDSS and Gemini observations (Henne et al. 2017). Only weak correlations have been found to date; if stronger correlations
exist, they could be identified through a statistical study
of host galaxy properties spanning both the global and
the local scales. Unfortunately, the paucity of higher
resolution imaging has limited SN host galaxy studies
at the pixel level and at high redshift. Our limited understanding of these correlations has resulted in an ad
hoc piecewise “Hubble-mass-step” correction to Hubble
Residuals (Kelly et al. 2010; Sullivan et al. 2010; Lampeitl et al. 2010; Kim et al. 2014). The SN Ia massluminosity correlation will remain even as other systematic effects are addressed by Rubin Observatory’s allsky photometric calibration, and it will soon become
a dominant source of uncertainty (Scolnic et al. 2018).
Characterizing these correlations now will be essential
for strengthening our ability to probe dark energy and
the expansion rate of the universe.
In this work, we explore the use of host galaxy information in classifying supernovae. We extend the
work done by Foley & Mandel (2013) by constructing

a database of host galaxy-supernova pairs greater than
an order of magnitude larger than the Lick Observatory
Supernova Search (LOSS; Li et al. 2000) sample they
use. We also consider > 140 additional host galaxy
features. In addition to our data products, we have
developed a new method for identifying transient host
galaxies in deep surveys using postage stamps of the
field. This method achieves accuracies superior to the
commonly used directional light radius method at lowz, and with greater completeness at high-z where little
morphological information is available. Our dataset for
this study contains the majority of previous spectroscopically classified supernovae and their host galaxies, and
this sample is intrinsically biased toward low-redshift
events (which are more easily detected). Because LSST
will expand our discovery space to higher redshift, our
database will need to be augmented with newly discovered SNe for GHOST to provide accurate classifications
on the LSST alert stream. Our pipeline for host galaxy
association will soon be integrated into the alert stream
of the Young Supernova Experiment (YSE), which observes a total survey area of 1500 square degrees in two
bands per epoch to discover and study supernovae before
peak brightness (Jones et al. 2019; Jones et al. 2020).
1.1. Structure of this Paper
We provide a schematic overview of this work in Figure 1. Our paper is laid out as follows: In §2, we describe our methodology for constructing and validating
our database of supernovae and their host galaxies. In §3
we outline the data and software products that accompany this work. These products can be used to query
the released database and identify the host galaxies of
new transients. We compare PS1-derived brightness
and morphology features of host galaxies using Principal
Component Analysis in §4. We then compare the host
galaxies of underrepresented supernova classes using tDistributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (tSNE) in
§4.2. Next, we introduce our algorithm to classify supernovae and present results in §5. Section §6 is devoted to
the analysis of supernovae originating in the same host
galaxy. We conclude by summarizing our results in §7
and discussing future directions for the research in §8.
2. HOST GALAXY IDENTIFICATION

To construct a dataset of supernova host galaxies, we
first assemble a dataset of spectroscopic supernovae. We
have downloaded all spectroscopically classified supernovae from the Transient Name Server (TNS; https://
wis-tns.weizmann.ac.il/) and the Open Supernova Catalog (OSC; https://sne.space/). After removing events
with identical names and positions, we are left with

4
20,736 events. We then implement a series of quality
cuts and a novel matching algorithm to identify the host
galaxies of supernovae in our sample. Our final database
contains host galaxy information for 16, 175 supernovae
– just over 78% of all spectroscopically classified events
at the time of writing. We outline our methodology for
matching supernovae with their host galaxies below.
2.1. PS1 Querying for Host Candidates
We use the first data release of Pan-STARRS (PS1;
Chambers et al. 2016) to search for candidate host galaxies due to its survey depth (5σ < 23.3 in g-band) and
extensive list of sources (>3B unique objects). We have
chosen Pan-STARRS data over SDSS for its superior sky
coverage and comparable depth (SDSS has a median 5σ
depth of 23.13 in g), and over alternative sky surveys for
its resolution (0.2500 /px, two orders of magnitude higher
than the 2100 /px resolution of the Transiting Exoplanet
Survey Satellite). We opt for the first data release to
take advantage of the bestDetection flag, which was corrupted in DR2.
To first order, a host galaxy can be found by crossmatching the redshift of the event with the redshifts
of nearby sources; however, the majority of supernovae
discovered prior to 2010 do not list a spectroscopic redshift in TNS, and the NASA Extragalactic Database
(NED1 ) is only 75% complete for redshifts of galaxies at
z ≤ 0.05. The catalog is even less complete at higher
redshifts (Kulkarni et al. 2018). For these reasons, supernovae and their host galaxies cannot be associated
by redshift alone. Instead, we construct a table of potential host galaxies for each transient event using the
following procedure:
1. Query Pan-STARRS for all catalogued objects
within 3000 of the supernova. If a host galaxy has
been reported in TNS or OSC, we instead take its
coordinates as the center of our cone search. The
resultant table is likely to contain artifacts and
other objects that are irrelevant to this analysis,
such as HII regions.

Figure 1. An outline of the analysis completed in this
work, with corresponding sections labeled. The primary data
sources for our supernova sample are given at the top of the
flowchart, and major steps within our pipeline are indicated
with text.

2. Use the PS1 primaryDetection = 1 flag to remove
duplicate detections of the same source. This is
common in fields containing a single large galaxy
with a spatially resolved core or many associated
HII regions. We identified multiple faint galaxies without a primaryDetection = 1 entry at this
stage, and so we caution that this cut may preferentially associate supernovae with nearby large
galaxies.
1 https://ned.ipac.caltech.edu/

5
3. Remove any object not detected in gri. We have
found that the number of artifacts in our candidate
host galaxy list increases dramatically without this
cut, but we do not cut on z or y bands so that we
retain high-z host galaxies in our sample.
4. Remove sources with bestDetection = 0 if at least
one source with bestDetection = 1 is present in
the field. If no best detection sources exist, do not
eliminate any potential host galaxies for that supernova. We had initially removed all sources with
bestDetection = 0, but found that this removed a
non-negligible fraction of plausible host galaxies.
5. Remove sources with qualityFlag = 128 (indicating a poor-quality stack object).
We list the fraction of supernovae removed at each of
these steps in Table 1. After removing the majority of
artifacts from our table, we eliminate the PS1 sources
corresponding to stars.
2.2. Star/Galaxy Separation for Deep Surveys
A useful feature for distinguishing point-like and extended sources is brightness measured in different apertures (Slater et al. 2020). The total flux of an unresolved
source can be captured equally well by a point-spread
function (PSF) model or by a more complicated aperture
model such as Kron, which defines the radius of its aperture as 2.5× the first radial moment of a source (Magnier et al. 2016). To first order, stars can be separated
from galaxies with a horizontal cut in mPSF − mKron
space (See section 6.3 of Chambers et al. 2016), where
stars will cluster around mPSF − mKron = 0. This cut
introduces a bias against distant high-redshift galaxies,
which are well-mixed with stars in this space faintward
of mPSF ∼21. Further, stars brighter than mPSF ∼15
will shift above this line because of saturation, and a
horizontal cut will not capture these bright sources.
To more accurately distinguish stars from potential
host galaxies, we query the PS1-Source Types and Redshifts with Machine learning (PS1-STRM) catalog from
Beck et al. (2020) for every source within our candidate
list. The PS1-STRM catalog uses a neural network to label sources as stars, galaxies, and QSOs. Out of ∼49,500
unique sources, nearly 48,000 belong to one of these categories, whereas the remaining 1,500 are listed as ‘unknown’. To classify this remaining subset, and to avoid
querying this database each time our pipeline is run,
we implement a Random Forest (RF; Breiman 2001)
algorithm to separate stars from galaxies and QSOs using features of PS1-STRM-classified sources. A Random Forest is a supervised learning algorithm composed

of an ensemble of decision trees. In the classification
problem, a random subset of input features is used to
construct each decision tree and predict the class of a
sample. Once the trees are constructed, the algorithm
assigns a final class with a majority vote of the output
from each tree. We use the random forest implementation in sklearn. For our final model, we require at
least 8 observations to split a branch, two features per
split, and a minimum of two observations per leaf (the
end of each tree). We train our RF model on the aperture magnitude (mAp ) of our potential host galaxies in
g, r, and i; mAp − mKron in the same bands; and the
4-dimensional color distance in g − r, r − i, i − z, and
z −y from the PS1 stellar locus, the path traced by stars
in color-color space. Because of its generality, the stellar locus is a valuable tool for photometric calibration
of large surveys (High et al. 2009). We can also use it to
help distinguish stars and galaxies, since stars within our
sample should closely trace the locus whereas galaxies
will not. Aperture magnitude is determined by integrating over the analytic PSF aperture, then extrapolating
the PSF model to estimate the flux that was missed.
We have chosen this measurement in place of mPSF because it accounts for local variations in the PSF, and as
a result its values have less dispersion (see Fig. 3). We
adopt a cubic spline with knots given by Tonry et al.
(2012) and an r − i bin width of 0.001 as our PS1 stellar
locus. To calculate the 4-dimensional distance of each
source from this locus, we use the equation (Covey et al.
2007):
4DCD = mink

4
2
X
(Ci − ti,k )
i=0

σi2

(1)

where Ci represents the ith color of a source, ti,k represents each value along the stellar locus for that color, and
σi represents the PS1 uncertainty in the source’s color
(calculated by combining the magnitude uncertainties in
quadrature). The 4DCD is the minimum value of this
equation calculated between all k points along the stellar locus. This value approaches the orthogonal distance
between a source and the stellar locus in 4D space as the
number of discretized locus points approaches infinity.
We considered the use of Gaia DR2 parallaxes as an
additional feature within our RF model, as it would allow us to distinguish between galactic stars and distant
galaxies; however, the depth of the survey (with a limiting magnitude of G = 21) limits its completeness for
a significant number of our sources. Further, the parallaxes reported in DR2 have significant uncertainties, and
training our RF to identify stars by their large parallaxes
would remove a non-negligible fraction of galaxies from
our sample as well.

6

Figure 2. Left. Postage stamps for a few RF-identified stars in our dataset using a decision threshold of 50% (above) and 80%
(below). Although the 50% model achieves high accuracies across the full dataset, it is more likely to erroneously identify bright
galactic nuclei as stars. By increasing the decision threshold to 80%, the RF model becomes less likely to flag these sources.
Right. The precision-recall curves for our RF model. The points top right indicate our final decision threshold. The green
(purple) line corresponds to the full (masked) sample, where the masked sample contains only sources with low photometric
uncertainty (M agErr < 0.02) and greater than 3 detections in griz. With a star/galaxy decision threshold of 80%, we achieve a
recall and precision of 92% for the full sample and 95% and 96%, respectively, for the masked sample. The inset confusion matrix
presents our final classification results on the full sample. Because we have biased our algorithm against removing potential
hosts, we achieve a 2% false negative rate for our galaxy classification with negligible impact on the mean accuracy, precision,
and recall of the model.

We now consider the accuracy, precision, and recall of
our model. The accuracy describes the total fraction of
the test sample that is correctly labeled, and for a given
class the precision is defined as
p=

Figure 3. The residuals in g − r and i − z colors calculated
between the PS1 stellar locus and identified stars within our
candidate host galaxy table. Colors have been corrected for
extinction using the reddening values and extinction coefficients from Schlafly & Finkbeiner (2011).

To quantify the performance of our star-galaxy separator, we divide our STRM-classified data into 70%
training and 30% testing sets, respectively. Next, we
re-balance the training set using the Python package
Imbalanced-learn. This prevents our algorithm from
improving accuracy by classifying every source as the
most populous class in the training data. Our training
set consists of 12,560 stars and 12,560 galaxies/QSOs
after re-balancing, and our testing set consists of 5,345
stars and 6,351 galaxies/QSOs. This brings our train
and test fractions to 68.2% and 31.8%, respectively.

TP
TP + FP

(2)

where the true positive rate T P describes the number
of objects correctly identified in this class and the false
positive rate F P describes the number of objects incorrectly labeled as members of this class. Recall is defined
as
TP
r=
(3)
TP + FN
where the false negative rate F N denotes the number
of objects incorrectly labeled as not belonging to this
class.
Our model achieves a mean precision, mean recall,
and mean accuracy of 93% each distinguishing stars and
galaxies/QSOs from this test set. We also create an
“ideal” sample of stars and galaxies by removing from
our dataset any sources with missing brightness information, ApM agErr > 0.02, ApM ag > 20, or fewer than
3 detections in griz. For the STRM-classified stars, we
also remove sources with psf Qf P erf ect < 0.9, which
would indicate that a non-negligible fraction of pixels
were masked in the stack detection of this source. After splitting into training and testing samples and rebalancing the training set as before, this curated sample

7
consists of 2,569 galaxies/QSOs and 2,569 stars in the
training set, and 2,559 galaxies/QSOs and 1,101 stars
in the testing set. Using the same model as before, our
mean precision, mean recall, and mean accuracy each
increase to 96%.
While this model achieves high accuracies on both our
full and curated samples, the precision and recall of stars
and galaxies should not be weighted equally. Retaining
host galaxy candidates is significantly more important
than removing all stars, since remaining stars may be removed by later cuts but it is highly unlikely that a galaxy
will be added back to the data once it is removed. For
this reason, we only remove sources that are classified as
stars to >80% probability by our RF model (instead of
the fiducial 50% cut). With this threshold, our mean accuracy on the full dataset decreases to 92% (a decrease
of 2%), but our precision for stars rises to 98% and our
recall for galaxies reaches 99%. Our mean precision on
the curated sample is now 95% (a decrease of 1%) but
our mean precision is unchanged. By minimizing the
number of galaxies misidentified as stars, we achieve a
classifier that is both accurate and conservative. We
show the precision-recall curve for our classifier in Fig.
2, along with the final confusion matrix after increasing
our decision threshold.
We then remove the STRM-identified stars and the
RF-predicted stars from our table of potential host
galaxies. Galaxies with the smallest separation from the
stellar locus and the stars with the largest locus separation were inspected using PS1 postage stamps, but no
manual re-association was done at this stage. The RFidentified galaxies with smallest separation to the locus
were nearly point sources, but were kept in the dataset
due to the likelihood that they were QSOs.
2.3. The Directional Light Radius for Host Galaxy
Association
Supernovae are often associated with a host galaxy using the directional light radius (DLR) prescription outlined in Gupta et al. (2016), where the angular separation θ is scaled by the radius of the host galaxy in the
direction of the event dDLR . A supernova embedded in
a large galaxy is more likely to be found further from
its host galaxy’s nucleus than a small galaxy, and this
normalized distance permits a direct comparison of supernova separations between host galaxies with vastly
different scales. Normalized separation metrics have already been adopted by the Supernova Legacy Survey
(SNLS; Sullivan et al. 2006) and the SDSS-II Supernova
Survey (SDSS-SNS; Sako et al. 2018). As the rate of
supernova detections continues to increase, the success
of the DLR method at low-z and in crowded fields has

made it the preferred method for automated host galaxy
association (see Gupta et al. 2016 for a detailed review).
The DLR method proceeds as follows. For a supernova located at (xSN , ySN ) and a potential host galaxy
located at (xGal , yGal ), the Stokes parameters U and Q
of the galaxy are given by its flux-weighted second order
moments in PS1:
U = MXY ;

Q = MXX − MY Y

(4)

The angular tilt φ of the galaxy relative to celestial north
is then found with
φ=

1
tan−1 (U/Q)
2

(5)

Next, we calculate the aspect ratio of the host galaxy
with
√
(1 + κ + 2 κ)
ra/b =
(6)
1−κ
where κ is derived from the two Stokes parameters:
κ = Q2 + U 2

(7)

The angle γ, describing the angle of the supernova position relative to the galactic center and celestial north,
is then found with
γ = tan−1

ySN − yGal
xSN − xGal

(8)

Finally, we arrive at the angle β subtended by the galactic semi-major axis and the vector connecting the supernova to the galactic center:
β =φ−γ
The DLR is found with these parameters and the
galaxy’s semi-major axis ra using the equation
dDLR = p

ra
(ra/b sinβ)2 + (cosβ)2

(9)

The scaled directional light radius is found by θ/dDLR ,
where θ is the Great Circle distance of a supernova from
the center of its host galaxy in arcseconds. An illustration of this method is given in Figure 4.
The DLR method uses second-order moments for estimating U and Q, which are model independent; however, estimating the host galaxy’s semi-major axis ra
may require us to adopt a light profile model. We have
selected the Kron radius, defined as 2.5× the first radial
moment of a candidate host galaxy’s surface brightness
profile, in the band which has the highest SNR, as our
value for ra to minimize this dependence. The mean rband Kron radius for all potential host galaxies at this
stage is 7.500 .

8
Gupta (2013) estimates that 7% of matches in his sample found using this method are erroneous, with an additional 3% of SNe left unassociated due to unreported second order moments. Using a naive DLR association, we
find our fraction to be significantly higher. This is due
to a combination of non-galaxy sources in our database
and multiple PS1 entries for a single source, both of
which were only partially removed in previous steps. To
mitigate this issue, we have modified the DLR method
outlined above. For each supernova in our sample, we
complete the following steps:
1. Find the Kron radius of each potential host galaxy
in the band with highest SNR. Then, calculate
dDLR . If either the Kron radius or the secondorder moments are not provided, remove this
source from the list of potential host galaxies. Repeat for all potential host galaxies.
2. Eliminate host galaxies with θ/dDLR > 5. If no
host galaxies remain after this step, the supernova
is reported to be hostless and added to the sample
of hostless events.
3. Rank-order the host galaxies by ascending values
of θ/dDLR .
4. If the remaining list contains at least one NEDidentified galaxy, select the galaxy with the lowest
θ/dDLR as host. If not, select the source with the
lowest θ/dDLR .
2.4. Limitations in the DLR Methodology Applied to
PS1 Data
The depth of PS1 has allowed us to construct a complete list of supernova host galaxies, but several issues
can arise in a survey as complete as PS1. First, deblending errors plague many of the low-z host galaxies
in our sample. These galaxies are often characterized
by several overlapping PS1 “sources”, and neither the
primaryDetection nor the bestDetection flags are able
to unambiguously identify the PS1 entry closest to the
true galaxy center.
Second, deep PS1 imaging is able to resolve dim host
galaxy features that would be missed in other surveys.
This introduces additional “sources” to the list of candidate host galaxies for a supernova, further crowding
low-redshift fields. Because of the de-blending errors associated with highly extended sources, we also find nonphysical Kron radius measurements for the majority of
these sources. We often find a PS1 source near the true
galactic center with an uncharacteristically low Kron radius, if one is reported at all. Conversely, sub-structures
such as HII regions and bright stars may “adopt” the

light profile of an entire galaxy and report uncharacteristically high Kron radius values. These issues bias
the DLR algorithm away from large host galaxies where
visual association would be trivial.
Third, high-redshift host galaxies can easily be mistaken for imaging artifacts, and are preferentially removed by the bestDetection flag. The Kron radius for
these objects is often (understandably) not reported.
This leads to an overabundance of unassociated supernovae in sparse fields.
We have attempted to develop a pipeline that is faulttolerant to these limitations in PS1 data, but accurate
radius estimates are critical to the success of the DLR
method in crowded fields. Gupta (2013) uses an upper
limit of θ/dDLR = 4 as a balance between sample purity and efficiency. We have extended this value to 5
to account for the low Kron radius estimates associated
with low-redshift host galaxies; we note that a similar
threshold is used for associating host galaxies in SNLS
(Sullivan et al. 2006).
By visually inspecting a subset of associated host
galaxies, we predict our overall misassociation rate with
the full pipeline to be ∼ 5%; however, for low-redshift
objects this rate can be as high as 30% for the reasons given above. When DLR fails to find the true host
galaxy, a supernova is often matched to an HII region
or bright star. To maintain the accuracy of our associations at low redshift, we have developed a novel host
galaxy association algorithm using the light profiles of
sources near the supernova of interest. We provide a
detailed description of this method below.
2.5. Host Galaxy Association using Background Image
Gradients
While deep imaging of extended host galaxies in PS1
makes source de-blending difficult, it makes visual association of SN host galaxies easier. We can rapidly
identify a host galaxy by eye by first determining if the
supernova is embedded within a galaxy’s light profile
and, if so, by tracing this profile from the location of
the supernova to the host galaxy’s center.
We have automated this process with a gradient ascent
method able to accurately locate the center of the host
galaxy in which a cataclysmic event is embedded. We
release this code with the rest of the GHOST software.
For each transient, we have downloaded an 800x800
pixel (20000 x20000 ) postage stamp of the field in gri.
We have also downloaded the corresponding PS1 image
stack masks and number counts. We use the stack masks
to remove saturated pixels, and the counts mask to remove pixels created from fewer than two stack images.
To remove stars that have not saturated the detector

9

-22°33'45"

DEC

34'00"

15"

30"

45"
8h19m41s

40s

39s

RA

38s

37s

Figure 4. The PS1 postage stamp for SN 2014dp, with
host galaxy candidates circled. We show the radius of each
candidate in the direction of the transient, calculated using
the Kron radius of the host galaxy and the DLR method in
§2.3. Despite the center of the true host galaxy lying further
from the transient event than other spurious candidates, the
true host galaxy (magenta) is correctly identified using our
modified DLR method. The match is verified using redshift
information from NED.

and any remaining starlight from those that have, we
use the DAOStarFinder routine within the photutils
package. We identify and remove sources matching a
gaussian light profile with FWHM∼3 at a threshold of
20 standard deviations above the median pixel intensity.
We have intentionally set our threshold high to prevent
us from masking AGN at the centers of galaxies, as these
provide meaningful gradient information. We then remove each identified star using a circular mask with a 5
pixel radius.
Once we have removed stars from the field, we use
Scipy to construct a two-dimensional cubic spline interpolation over the pixels that were previously masked.
We apply zero-points to these gri images, average them
together in magnitude space, and convert back to flux
to generate a PS1-averaged image A. Next, we use the
Background2D function within photutils to create an
image dominated by the light profiles of galaxies within
the field. This function is typically used to estimate
spatially-varying background noise from a crowded field
and study smaller sources in detail. Because a galaxy
halo can be conceptualized as background noise to the
structure within the halo, we can use this same function
to create a version of image A dominated by the light
profiles of galaxies in the field and with minimal remaining effects from dust and HII regions. This smoothed

image, which we call B, forms the basis for our gradient
ascent method.
To estimate the sky background, Background2D divides a pointing into evenly sized smaller regions, applies a median filter across each smaller region, then
interpolates the resulting pixels back to the resolution
of the original postage stamp. This smoothing requires
a careful selection of both the size of each sub-region, or
box, and the size of the median filter. Ideally, the size
of each box should be larger than the galactic structure
comprising the host galaxy of interest, and small enough
to capture its radial light profile. A large sub-region and
median filter will smooth local brightness variations; a
small sub-region and median filter will preserve them.
As a result, the size of the sub-region needed to resolve
a host galaxy’s light profile will change drastically from
field to field. We have empirically determined a set of
criteria for predicting whether the true host galaxy will
fall into one of three size categories - “small”, “medium”,
or “large”. These criteria determine the sizes of the image boxes and the median filter. A box of 75x75 pixels
is used for large host galaxies, while boxes of 40x40 and
15x15 px are used for medium and small host galaxies, respectively. The median filter used for large and
medium host galaxies is 3x3 pixels; for small host galaxies, no filter is applied to the data.
The estimated size of the true host galaxy is based
upon four measurements:
˜ The sigma-clipped median count of the image.
1. I:
This metric attempts to characterize the flux of
non-stellar light across the full postage stamp. A
high value of I˜ suggests a large host galaxy in the
field, but can also indicate bright stars that were
not completely removed.
2. fIM : The fraction of pixels in the 800x800 pixel
image with a photon count of at least unity. This
metric provides additional evidence for a single extended source dominating the field, and is less biased by stellar saturation.
3. fSN : The fraction of pixels within a 200x200
pixel box centered on the supernova with a photon
count of at least unity. This provides strong evidence for the spatial extent of the true host galaxy.
If both fSN and fIM are near unity, a host galaxy
is deemed large; if fSN is large but fIM is small,
a medium host galaxy is assumed.
4. ISN : The image count at the location of the supernova. If this value is above a certain threshold, the host galaxy is deemed “small”. This may

10

(a)

(b)

Figure 5. a. The gradient ascent algorithm applied to SN2017erp. The red circles correspond to the positions of PS1 sources
eliminated before the DLR calculation, while the blue circles (scaled by dDLR ) denote potential host galaxies at the DLR stage.
The dark magenta dashed circle denotes the DLR-selected host galaxy, while the smaller dashed gold circle at center denotes the
PS1 source selected by gradient ascent. The position of the supernova is given by the yellow star. Despite numerous spurious
detections in the field, the gradient ascent algorithm is able to rapidly identify the true host galaxy, which was later verified by
redshift. b. The estimated background light profile of the central host galaxy, found by dividing the postage stamp into squares
and applying a median filter to each of these sub-regions. We give the background pixel gradients, in blue, at every 20th pixel
for clarity. The path traversed by the gradient ascent method is marked in dark magenta, and the black circle marks the final
location reached. By masking saturated pixels and point-sources, we recover the light profile from the true host galaxy.

appear counterintuitive, but this designation suggests that the supernova occurred near its host
galaxy center. It is important that we use a small
filter in this case to preserve the precise location
of the host galaxy center.
A large filter can shift the location of a host galaxy
center due to a combination of AGN masking and edge
effects. To recover the local peak, we normalize and
combine images A and B into a weighted average (image
C). The weights applied to A and B are determined by
the magnitude of ISN and the number of masked pixels
in image A. Image B is given the dominant weighting
in the resulting image unless ISN is above a threshold,
for the same reason described above. If more than 15%
of the image has been masked, the cubic interpolation
of the image becomes unreliable and artificial photon
counts from interpolated masked stars contaminate A.
If this occurs, the reference image A is given a weight of
0 and C = B.
Once we have our final profile-dominated image C,
we estimate the two-dimensional gradient at each pixel

using the numpy package. We use second-order central
differencing at the interior points of each image and firstorder differencing at the boundaries. We begin at the
location of our supernova (xi , yi ) = (xSN , ySN ) in pixels
and update the position according to the image gradient
∇C(xi , yi ), using a forward Euler updating scheme:
(xi+i , yi+1 ) = (xi , yi ) + h∇C(xi , yi )

(10)

Here h represents a chosen step size. After completing
a step, we round our updated position coordinates to
the nearest pixel. By tracing the local gradient in the
postage stamp, the algorithm “crawls” to local areas of
increased brightness. For spatially extended sources, the
gradients will cause the step to terminate at or near the
center of the supernova’s host galaxy. The algorithm iterates until the calculated position has reached the edge
of the postage stamp or for 1000 steps, whichever comes
sooner. If the algorithm reaches a region of the image
with a gradient smaller than a pixel, we use the numpy
random function to randomly perturb its location by one
pixel in any direction. This feature, combined with the

11
large number of total iterations, prevents the algorithm
from getting trapped in a local maximum. After the
algorithm terminates, we conduct a PS1 cone search at
the terminated position. The radius of this search is 500
for “small” or “medium” host galaxies (see above criteria), and 2000 for “large” host galaxies. We eliminate
sources with only one PS1 detection, and then select the
non-stellar source closest to the terminated position. We
illustrate this algorithm in Figures 5a and 5b.
For this algorithm to be successful, we must select a physically relevant step size h. This must be
large enough to “overlook” remaining deviations from a
smooth light profile, and small enough to prevent overshooting the true center of a host galaxy. For a given
field, We calculate h by multiplying the mean Kron radius for all potential host galaxies by an empirical scale
factor based on the four criteria outlined above. We use
a large scale factor when the supernova occurs within a
large galaxy dominating the postage stamp, and a small
scale factor when the supernova occurs within a small
extended source. This allows our step sizes to vary with
the scale of the most likely host galaxy even when the
true host galaxy is unknown. This scale factor also accounts for unrealistically low PS1 Kron radius values, as
is described in greater detail in 2.4. If we adopt a scale
factor of unity, the algorithm terminates in a majority
of fields before the galactic center is reached.
We trigger this algorithm when a host galaxy is not
found using DLR, and when a candidate host galaxy is
missing the morphology information necessary for the
DLR method. There are 2,137 supernovae matching the
first criterion, and 3,129 matching the second. We find
by visual inspection that the gradient ascent method
achieves a 12% misassociation rate for the incomplete
morphology sample, compared to 16% for the DLR
method. We additionally find a ∼ 3% misassociation
rate for the “hostless” sample, which generally consists
of less crowded fields. More importantly, our method recovers 800 host galaxies from the hostless sample. This
is nearly half of the supernovae removed by the DLR
method and roughly 4% of all spectroscopic supernovae.
We have included these matches in our final database.
Our gradient ascent method reliably recovers transient
host galaxies at low-redshifts when a large galaxy dominates the field, and at high-redshifts with sparse fields.
When the host galaxy is large and the field is crowded,
the large filter selected can blend multiple galaxies and
shift the peak of the true host galaxy’s light profile. This
causes the algorithm to terminate at an artificial maximum, and can lead to incorrect associations.
To be useful for early-time classification, our host association pipeline must be fast. We have timed our com-

plete pipeline for five low-z (z < 0.001) events and five
high-z (z > 0.4) events from TNS. We find a median of
85 ± 4 s per event for the low-z sample and a median
of 73 ± 37 s per event for the high-z sample. The large
spread in association times at high-z is caused by the
gradient ascent method, which is only triggered when
the DLR method fails. More low-z events triggered gradient ascent because the large physical projections involved makes it harder to find the center of the true host
galaxy. The majority of time elapsed during the gradient ascent method is spent querying PS1 for postage
stamps of the field; if images are provided in advance
(or the association is done over a faster internet connection), latency will likely decrease.
After incorporating host galaxies matched with the
gradient ascent method, we manually re-associate an
additional 425 supernovae (∼ 2.6% of our table) by
eye that were mismatched in our sample and another
69 low-z supernovae (0.4% of our table). These low-z
supernovae were the events from TNS with z < 0.014
(dL ≈ 60 Mpc) that were not successfully associated by
our pipeline. In the majority of cases, the hosts of these
supernovae were either >3000 from the event or reported
unphysical radius information in PS1 and dropped at
the DLR stage. We further identify misassociations by
plotting the redshift of each supernova as a function of
its angular separation θ from its host galaxy. Multiple
associations indicate θ > 1500 and z > 0.1, corresponding
to a physical separation of > 30 kpc. Although supernovae have been discovered as far as 80 kpc from their
host centers from tidal interactions with other galaxies
(Ferretti et al. 2017), events at this separation are probably uncommon (see Figure 2 of Galbany et al. 2012).
To confirm this sample as misassociated, we identify the
matches where the supernova redshift differs from its
host galaxy’s redshift by greater than 50%. We plot
this sample in Figure 6a. These ∼ 300 events occur predominantly at zSN > 0.1 and comprise the majority of
our high-z matches with large separation. We have removed these events from our database. We estimate the
misassociation rate of our final database to be < 3%,
lower than the missasociation rate reported by Gupta
et al. (2016). We list the fraction of total supernovae
dropped from our sample at each stage of the pipeline
in Table 1.
Our final database contains host galaxies for 78% of
all spectroscopically classified supernovae, higher than
the completeness reported by Gupta (2013) (73%, or
15,826/21,787 candidates) and spanning a significantly
wider range in redshift. We have associated the majority of spectroscopic supernovae within z < 0.62; the
furthest supernova candidate in Gupta (2013) was at

12
Pipeline Step

Fraction Removed

Total Fraction

PS1 30 cone search for nearby host galaxies
Removal of sources not detected in gri
Removal of sources with qualityFlag = 128, primaryDetection = 0, bestDetection = 0
Star, galaxy separation with SVM
Directional light radius host galaxy association
Gradient ascent host galaxy association
Redshift mismatch
Manual reassociation

7.3%
3.2%
<0.1%
3.6%
10.3%
-3.9%
1.9%
-0.4%

92.7%
89.5%
89.5%
85.9%
75.6%
79.5%
77.6%
78.0%

00

Table 1. The fraction of total spectroscopically classified supernovae removed from our database at each stage of the association
pipeline. We also list the total SN fraction remaining after each step.

(a)

(b)

Figure 6. a. The redshifts of supernovae in our sample as a function of angular separation from their host galaxy. Small
points are colored by the host galaxy’s r-band Kron radius. We find a θ distribution roughly matching that given in Galbany
et al. (2012) but with multiple high-z host galaxies with θ > 1500 . In most of these high-z cases, the host galaxy’s Kron radius
is too small to reasonably explain this wide separation. By flagging the systems where the host galaxy’s redshift differs by more
than 50% of the supernova’s redshift (the large points in red), we confirm that this high-z sample is composed of predominantly
misassociated systems.
b. The distribution of spectroscopic redshifts for supernovae with associated host galaxies in GHOST and those without
identified host galaxies. The median of each distribution is shown. Assuming a standard cosmology (H0 =67.8, Ω0 = 0.3) and a
flat Universe, the supernovae in our sample lie at a median luminosity distance of ≈318 Mpc, while the unassociated sample
lies at a median luminosity distance of ≈1.7 Gpc. We are able to associate the majority of supernovae within z < 0.62; the
supernova sample analyzed in Gupta (2013) spanned the range 0.01 ≤ z ≤ 0.46.

z = 0.46. 33.2% of events within our unassociated sample occurred at declinations below −30◦ , where a host
galaxy search was excluded because no PanSTARRS
3PI survey images would be available. Excluding these
events brings the fraction of associated supernovae to
84%. The remaining unassociated supernovae are located at significantly higher redshifts than the supernovae in the associated sample, as is shown in Fig. 6b.

It is possible that even PS1 depths are insufficient to
resolve these host galaxies.
43 supernova pairs in our final table have the same
redshift, similar discovery dates (within 100 days of each
other), and coordinates within 1 arcsecond of each other.
These duplicates were removed. Two supernovae within
1 arcsecond of each other have discovery dates greater
than one year apart. This pair of events is SN007ie, a

13
type Ia supernova discovered on May 9th, 2007 at an RA
and Dec (J2000) of 334.4029◦ , 0.6133◦ ; and PS1-11aqj,
a type II supernova discovered on February 9th, 2011 at
an RA and Dec of 334.4028◦ , 0.6134◦ .
3. DATA AND SOFTWARE PRODUCTS

3.1. The GHOST Database2
The Galaxies HOsting Supernova Transients (GHOST)
database contains 16, 175 spectroscopically classified supernovae and the photometric properties of their host
galaxies. The full table can be downloaded as a CSV,
and the host galaxy data for OSC supernovae have been
added to the JSON data files and re-released for convenience. We have also included 1,436 masses estimated from host galaxy photometry (Foundation, Foley et al. 2018; PS1COSMO, Scolnic et al. 2018, Jones
et al. 2018a), Hubble residuals of 124 SNe Ia (Kaepora,
Siebert et al. 2019), host galaxy and transient spectra
(Sloan Digital Sky Survey, York et al. 2000; TNS), and
transient light curves. In addition, we have developed
software for querying the database and associating new
host galaxies. We describe the functionality of the code
in the following sections.
3.2. Analysis Tools for the GHOST Database
We have developed and released a Python package
called astro ghost to analyze the GHOST data products.
It can be found at the repository for this work. The
package also contains our full DLR and gradient ascent
association pipelines. We list several functions for parsing the database below, along with a basic description
of their use:
• getTransientHosts: Inputs the name and location
of a transient or list of transients. If the transient
is not found in the database by name or location,
the association pipeline is run and the most likely
host galaxy (one per transient) is returned.
• getHostStatsFromTransientCoords: Inputs the location of the transient as an astropy SkyCoord
object, and returns basic statistics about a host
galaxy (including other associated transients in
the database).
• getHostStatsFromTransientName: Inputs the TNS
name of a transient, and returns basic statistics
about a host galaxy.
• getTransientStatsFromHostName: Generates basic
statistics for a transient (or a series of tran2 https://github.com/uiucsn/astro ghost

sients) based on the NED-reported name of its
host galaxy.
• getTransientStatsFromHostCoords: Generates basic statistics for a transient, based on host galaxy
location as a astropy SkyCoord object.
• getHostImage: Inputs a transient TNS name and
returns a postage stamp of the most likely host
galaxy in one of the PS1 bands - g, r, i, z, y - as
a fits file, and plots the image in gri as a color
image.
• getTransientSpectra: Plots the spectrum of the
transient from TNS, if it is available.
• getHostSpectra: Plots the spectrum of the host
galaxy from SDSS or NED.
• coneSearchPairs: Completes a cone search for all
transient-host pairs whose transient location falls
within a certain radius, returned as a pandas
dataframe. Useful for identifying supernovae associated with the same system where the NED name
in the database is that of an HII region or star
within the galaxy.
• fullData: Returns the full GHOST database.
Sample code outlining the usage of each of these functions is provided at the link above.
3.3. The GHOST Viewer3
We have also created a website for simultaneously
viewing all host postage stamps in our database. This
website is hosted at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA). Postage stamps are
dynamically scaled in real time so that the user may
rapidly view many host galaxies or individual systems
of interest. Host galaxy images are color-coded by the
class of the supernova matched to them. After selecting
a postage stamp, a basic summary of both the supernova and its host galaxy are provided in a sidebar. Users
may interactively search the database for a specific supernova by name, spectral class, or by the name of its
host galaxy. Interactive plots showing the spectra of
both host galaxy and supernova are also presented, and
this data can be downloaded as a CSV. Both GHOST and
its associated viewer will be updated as new supernovae
are reported.
3 GHOST.ncsa.illinois.edu

14

Figure 7. A screenshot of the GHOST Viewer, which consolidates 16, 175 host galaxy postage stamps and basic information
about the supernovae they host into a streamlined GUI. A pop-up sidebar provides spectra for both supernova and host galaxy,
if they are available. Light curve data from the Open Supernova Catalog is also presented. By viewing many identified host
galaxies simultaneously, incorrect associations can be rapidly identified and population statistics can be studied in greater detail.
4. DIMENSIONALITY REDUCTION

Our final dataset contains 317 features of 16, 175
PS1 sources, along with the following seven features
of their associated supernovae: right ascension, declination, class, name, redshift, angular offset θ, and
scaled angular offset θ/dDLR . Nearly half of the host
galaxy features characterize the source’s detection in
PS1. These include the pixel coordinates of the source
in each filter, the number of source detections, and the
detection ID in each band. Nevertheless, the large number of remaining features prohibits a brute-force search
for supernova correlations. Further, galaxy features are
highly correlated with each other, leading to empirical
relationships such as the color-magnitude relation (Bell
et al. 2004) and the Fundamental Plane for ellipticals
(Dressler et al. 1987). These properties can reveal similar information about a galaxy’s position along an evolutionary track. As a result, these features likely do not
provide unique information about the class of a supernova.
To test this hypothesis, we construct a correlation matrix, given in Figure 8, for the galaxy features in GHOST.
We use Spearman’s rank correlation over the Pearson
correlation because the latter describes only linear relationships, whereas the former quantifies the ability of
a relationship to be described by any monotonic function. For features present in each band, we have only
shown those features in g. We find that over half of our

single-band features are > 80% correlated, and the same
features across multiple bands are even more strongly
correlated. The strong correlations between magnitude,
flux, and radial moments of host galaxies in GHOST appear as blocks within the full correlation matrix. These
blocks form a regular grid across our matrix due to the
strong correlations between brightness features in each
band. Aperture radius is not strongly correlated with
our other photometric features, and therefore appears
as a gap in the correlation blocks.
4.1. Identifying Dominant Host Galaxy Features with
Principal Component Analysis
To reduce our list of host galaxy parameters without
reducing their predictive power, we undertake a principal component analysis (PCA) of our galaxy data. In
PCA, a dataset is transformed to a set of orthogonal
components with the first principal component containing the most uncorrelated variance. A dataset composed
of highly correlated features will be well-characterized
by a single principal component, which is a linear combination of the original features.
We begin by re-scaling our host galaxy features so that
each has a mean of 0 and a variance of 1. Each of our
features is continuous instead of categorical, rendering
one-hot encoding unnecessary. Re-scaling is necessary
to directly compare features whose values may differ in
both magnitude and range. If a single feature contains a

15

Figure 8. The Spearman rank correlation between PS1 source features in a single band (g), with blue corresponding to
negatively correlated features and red corresponding to positively correlated features. Over half of the features are strongly
correlated, particularly the magnitude of the host galaxy in different apertures and its first and second order radial moments.
Strong correlations can also be seen in the same features across multiple bands (inset at right), leading to the block structure
of the matrix.

wide range of values, the first calculated principal component will capture most of the variance in this feature
alone and not across all features. Next, we transform
our GHOST database to its first two principal components
using the sklearn package in Python. These principal
components capture over half (55%) of the total variation in host galaxy features, confirming the degeneracy
shown in Fig. 8.

By reducing the dimensionality of our dataset, we
can visually identify differences between classes of supernovae. We present a biplot of our principal component model in Figure 9 along with the transformed
distributions of SN Ia, SN Ib/c, and SLSN host galaxies. Because the principal components are linear combinations of the galaxy features, we can represent the
initial galaxy features as vectors in this reduced space.

16

Figure 9. The PCA-transformed distribution of host galaxy
parameters for three supernova classes in our data: SN Ia,
SN Ib/c, and SLSN.For clarity, we plot in black the feature vectors in r with highest loading along the two principal component axes. The SN Ib/c and SLSN distributions
are centered at different positions along the first principal
component, suggesting host galaxies with different size and
brightness properties. The distribution of SN Ia host galaxies is bimodal, suggesting multiple host galaxy populations.
A distinct group of SLSNe can also be seen top center. These
galaxies host unusually energetic SNe (see text) – an indication that SN anomalies can be found by the properties of
their host galaxies. Postage stamps correspond to the peak
of the SN Ib/c distribution (orange border) and the peaks of
the SN Ia distribution (green borders)
.

The loading of each vector is defined as its projected
length along each PCA axis; this quantifies the weight
assigned to that feature in calculating a principal component. Highly linearly correlated features are given
similar weights along the two axes, and we can see a clustering of magnitude, flux, and morphological features
forming the dominant contributions to this PCA space.
The first principal component, which explains 44.5% of
the variation in host galaxy information, is determined
nearly equally by the Kron radius of a source and its
PSF, Kron, and Aperture magnitudes. The second principal component, which explains 10.4% of the variation,
is determined mainly by the PSF flux, momentRH (the
square root of the first radial moment) and ExtN Sigma
in each band (a PS1 derived feature extremely similar
to our mAp − mKron mag, ExtN Sigma is defined as the
difference between PSF and Kron magnitude of a source
subtracted by the stellar median value and divided by

the error combined in quadrature; see Magnier et al.
2016 for more information). SN Ia host galaxies are
widely distributed in this space, with two peaks at separate locations along both principal components. The
two highest-density contours for host galaxies of SNe
Ib/c span a significantly smaller range in PCA space
than the highest-density contours for host galaxies of
SNe Ia, although with a smaller sample size (591 SNe
Ib/c vs. 6,279 SNe Ia) this homogeneity may be unphysical. These three classes are also centered at different locations in PC space, providing a useful diagnostic
tool for distinguishing classes of supernovae without any
information from their explosions.
The multimodal distribution of SN Ia host galaxies
in this PCA space suggests multiple distinct populations, particularly given the large sample size of this
class. In addition, the strong overlap with the two other
groups suggests that SN Ia host galaxies are photometrically similar to galaxies hosting SNe Ib/c and SLSNe.
By embedding postage stamps corresponding to each
peak in Fig. 9, we can see that one SN Ia mode aligns
with bright spiral galaxies (which are similar to SN Ib/c
hosts), whereas the other aligns with faint, featureless
hosts (which are similar to SLSN hosts). The bimodality of SN Ia host galaxies also presents a challenge for
classification. SN Ia residing within host galaxies at the
left peak are likely to be misclassified as SLSNe, and
SNe Ia within host galaxies at the right peak are likely
to be misclassified as SNe Ib/c. Despite this overlap, the
separation along the first principal component suggests
that type information is revealed by host information
alone.
By reducing the dimensionality of our host galaxy features, we can also rapidly identify outliers within GHOST.
Fig. 9 reveals a sub-sample of SLSN host galaxies that
are well-separated from the rest of the distribution in
PCA space. This population is comprised of four supernovae in our dataset. Two of these are SN2213-1745
and SN2016aps, events whose hyper-energetic explosions
make them strong candidates for pair-instability or pulsational pair-instability supernovae (Cooke et al. 2012;
Nicholl et al. 2020). SN2016aps is the brightest supernova ever discovered, with peak absolute magnitude of
−22.35 ± 0.09 in i. Another supernova in this sample
is SN2017gci, which was listed in the original AT report as a candidate cataclysmic variable; and LSQ14fxj,
which has been alternatively classified as a SLSN, SN
Ic, and an unusually bright Ia by different groups. From
the feature loadings in Fig. 9, it is possible that some
of these events correspond to the faintest SLSN host
galaxies in our sample; indeed, SN2017gci was initially
listed as hostless, and the estimated redshift of SN2213-

17
1745 is z = 2.0458 ± 0.0005 (Cooke et al. 2012), making
it the most distant SN in our sample. The fact that
these rare supernovae are associated with outliers in
our host galaxy sample suggests a strong correlation between transient and host galaxy. Studying these host
galaxies in more detail will likely shed light on these
enigmatic events.
Because significantly more variance from our full table
is captured by the first PCA component, we can better
distinguish SN classes by projecting the data along only
this axis. We show Gaussian kernel density estimates
(KDEs) for our SNe along the first principal component
in Fig. 10. Because sample sizes vary dramatically between classes, the spread may not be representative of
the true underlying populations; however, the medians
of each distribution are illustrative.
Broadly categorizing this principal component as “size
and brightness” and the second principal component as
“light profile” in alignment with the loadings from Figure 9, we can now identify systematic physical differences between classes. The host galaxy distributions
for type II, Ib/c, and IIb supernovae peak at nearly
the same location and feature a heavy rightward skew,
a strong indication that these supernovae are found in
host galaxies with similar brightness and Kron radius.
These hosts are distinct from SLSN host galaxies, which
have a strong leftward skew; and host galaxies of Ia supernovae, which are not strongly skewed in either direction. By visually inspecting a subset of postage stamps
corresponding to these populations, we find our SN Ib/c
and SN II host galaxies to consist mainly of large spirals,
whereas our SLSNe are hosted in smaller galaxies with a
range of different morphologies. Visual inspection of our
SN Ia host galaxy sample did not reveal any consistent
trends with respect to size or morphology, potentially
explaining the wide spread of the SN Ia KDE. This suggests that the horizontal axis in Figure 10 corresponds
roughly to brighter, larger galaxies toward the right and
smaller, fainter galaxies toward the left. These results
are in agreement with previous findings that SLSNe-I are
found almost exclusively in low-mass dwarf galaxies with
low star formation rates (Perley et al. 2016; Leloudas
et al. 2015; Lunnan et al. 2015; Angus et al. 2016) and
core-collapse supernovae occur predominantly in latetype galaxies with high star formation rates (Cappellaro
et al. 1999; Hamuy 2003).
The multiple peaks of SNe Ia host galaxies from Fig.
9 are also seen in Fig. 10. This provides additional
evidence for multiple host galaxy populations with distinct size, brightness, and morphology. Previous studies
have shown that SNe Ia occur within a broad range of
galaxies (Gómez de Castro & Wamsteker 2006).

Figure 10. The distributions of supernova classes as a function of their loading along the first principal component from
our PCA analysis. In this space, a type IIb supernova (SN
IIb) is easily differentiated from a superluminous supernova
(SLSN). The host properties of IIb, II, and Ib/c are nearly
indistinguishable.

It is possible that these host galaxy differences can
be attributed at least in part to differences in redshift.
The fact that the postage stamp at the peak of our SN
Ib/c distribution reveals significantly more morphological information than the postage stamp near the peak of
the SLSN distribution seems to verify this prediction, as
SLSNe are found at systematically higher redshifts than
SNe Ib/c. In addition, the archival data we have used
contain observational biases that systematically underrepresent the number of supernovae at higher redshifts.
While we are unable to completely constrain the redshift dependence of our features, no single magnitudelimited survey to date contains enough spectroscopically
confirmed events of each class to construct a redshiftbalanced sample. We have found our PCA results to be
consistent for a sub-sample of our data consisting of only
low-z (< 0.014) host galaxies, but we caution that this
work represents only a first pass toward characterizing
supernova host galaxies.
4.2. Comparing Host Galaxy Distributions with tSNE
While PCA is valuable for visualizing data, it is only
able to compose reduced dimensional spaces from linear combinations of features. This renders it unable to
identify nonlinear correlations that may be valuable for
our analysis. The limitations of this method can be seen
in the wide separation between host galaxy magnitude
and flux vectors in Fig. 9, suggesting no correlation.

18

Figure 11. Distributions of host galaxy features for SNe
Ia, SNe Ib/c, and SLSNe along the first dimension of our
2D tSNE, with dashed lines indicating the median of each
distribution. Relative positions and shapes of the three distributions are consistent with the results from our principal
component analysis given in Fig. 10, suggesting different
underlying host galaxy populations.

To explore nonlinear relationships between our host
galaxy features, we implement t-Distributed Stochastic
Neighbor Embedding (tSNE) (van der Maaten & Hinton 2008). In tSNE, the transformation preserves the
distribution of separations between points. This makes
it another useful tool for directly comparing multiple
classes of objects while preserving nonlinear correlations
between features.
We begin by projecting our data into a threedimensional tSNE space using the sklearn implementation. We select a perplexity of 30 and a learning rate
of 200. To compare our results with the PCA analysis completed in §4.1, we project our supernovae along
only the first tSNE axis. We present KDEs for our
transformed host galaxy data for SNe Ia, SNe Ib/c, and
SLSNe along this axis in Fig. 11. As before, we see a
leftward skew for SLSN host galaxies and rightward skew
for SN Ib/c host galaxies. The medians of these distributions occur at significantly different positions along
this axis. tSNE is a stochastic algorithm, and we have
verified through multiple iterations that the differences
between our distributions are insensitive to the random
seed used. These results suggest that the systematic
differences between core-collapse, SN Ia, and SLSN host
galaxies are robust, with SLSNe preferentially found in
small and faint host galaxies and core-collapse supernovae found preferentially in large, bright host galaxies.
To further explore nonlinear correlations, we transform our host galaxy features into a three-dimensional
t-SNE space. We find striking visual differences in the

distributions of SN IIP, SLSN, and SN IIb host galaxies
along the second and third t-SNE axes, which we plot
in Fig. 12. SLSN and SN IIb host galaxies are most
easily distinguished in this space, and SN IIP hosts are
centered near the middle of the two distributions and
span the full space of SN host galaxy features. We have
found the separation between SN IIb and SLSN host
galaxies to be robust for a range of perplexities and initial random seeds, suggesting that real discriminatory
information exists between these classes. These results
also suggest that certain supernova sub-types may easier to distinguish using host galaxy features than SNe Ia
and core-collapse events. Larger sample sizes from upcoming surveys, especially at higher redshifts, will make
it possible to investigate the host galaxy correlations of
these underrepresented events in greater detail.
Figure 9 suggests that our ability to distinguish supernova host galaxies by class is redshift-dependent. This
relationship becomes more evident when we plot the
redshifts for the same SN IIP, SN IIb, and SLSN host
galaxies described above. In the left panel of Figure 12,
we find that redshift roughly decreases toward the bottom left of our tSNE space and increases toward the top
right. SLSNe events are highly coincident with highredshift host galaxies and SN IIb events are highly coincident with low-redshift host galaxies. This reflects previous findings that SLSNe preferentially occur at highz and core-collapse events have been preferentially observed at low-z, particularly SNe IIb (Kelly & Kirshner
2012).
We can partially account for these redshift effects by
calculating the absolute magnitudes of our host galaxies. First, we convert our PS1 magnitudes to the
SDSS photometric system using the model developed
by Finkbeiner et al. (2016). We then k-correct our host
galaxy magnitudes using the SDSS color-conversion
from Chilingarian & Zolotukhin (2012) and convert to
rest-frame using the galaxy redshifts found in NED.
We show g-band rest-frame and absolute magnitudes
of these hosts in the right panel of Fig. 12. SN IIb
and SLSN host galaxies in g are well-separated by restframe magnitude, but after correcting for their redshifts
reported in NED we find that the absolute magnitudes
of these host galaxies are nearly identical. This supports the evidence from our 2D tSNE plot that previously discovered SNe IIb and SLSNe occur at distinct
redshifts. Though these host galaxies are similar in
intrinsic brightness, they can still be distinguished at
early times by the redshifts at which they more frequently occur. A volume-limited survey would confirm
whether these redshift-dependent rates reflect our observational biases or underlying formation mechanisms

19

(a)

Figure 12. Left, Above. The distribution of host features corresponding to three classes of supernovae (SNe IIP, SNe IIb,
and SLSNe) along our second and third tSNE axes. SLSN and SN IIb host galaxies are easily separable in this space, whereas
SN IIP hosts are centered between the two distributions and span a much wider range of values. Left, Below. The same host
galaxies as above, colored by redshift. The clustering of SNe IIb and SLSNe in tSNE space is highly redshift-dependent. Right,
Above. Histograms for the k-corrected g-band Kron magnitudes of the same hosts as in left. Distribution colors match the
supernova classes top left. SLSN host galaxies are fainter than nearly all SN IIb host galaxies; SN IIP host galaxies span both
distributions. Right, Below. Histograms for the g-band absolute Kron magnitudes of these hosts. After correcting for host
redshift, the distributions of the three classes are nearly coincident. This implies that the majority of the observed differences
between SLSN, SN IIP, and SN IIb host galaxies are caused by redshift-dependent event rates.

for SN IIb and SLSN events. If these trends persist in
future datasets, they could also be used to validate photometric redshifts of these classes.
5. SUPERNOVA CLASSIFICATION

5.1. Random Forest: Methods
We are now able to quantify the predictive power of
host galaxy information in supernova classification. As
in our star-galaxy separator, we implement a random
forest model for this classification.
First, we remove all host galaxy features from our final
table that do not describe physically meaningful information. These include PS1 IDs, PS1 data quality flags
and features that reflect the quality of model fits. After removing rows containing missing values, we are left
with 11,873 supernovae. In order to ensure accurate

matches for classification, we also drop all rows where
the redshift of the associated host differs by greater than
5% from the redshift of the supernova (if both are reported). We then consolidate supernova class labels.
First, we consolidate our training data into two
classes: core-collapse supernovae (including SNe Ib/c,
SNe II, and all sub-classes of SN II events) and type Ia
supernovae (SNe Ia). The vast majority of supernovae
within GHOST are SNe Ia, and in a magnitude-limited
survey the majority of discovered events will also be SNe
Ia. Training our random forest on the observed distribution of events would improve the classification accuracy
when tested on data matching this distribution, but the
tendency of the classifier to preferentially identify SNe Ia
would prevent it from learning fundamental differences
between the host galaxies of underrepresented supernova

20
classes. The imbalanced training set would also lead to
more wrong classifications for rarer events, as the algorithm would determine that any event with ambiguous
host galaxy properties is likely a SN Ia. Further, the intrinsic rates of undersampled supernovae remain poorly
understood (Strolger et al. 2015) and therefore poorly
constrained (Prajs et al. 2017). Observed rates also suffer from known systematic effects such as Malmquist
bias (Leaman et al. 2011). Because we are unable to rebalance our dataset to match the intrinsic rates of each
class, a model trained on this data would maximize accuracy by predicting on observed population rates. Because we are primarily focused on characterizing host
galaxies and not event rates, we re-balance our training
set using the package Imbalanced-learn.
We first use k-fold cross-validation to generate five
samples of equal size. One of these samples is chosen as
the test data in our first random forest model, and the
remaining 80% of the data is used as our training set. To
re-balance our training data, we undersample our largest
class (SN Ia) and oversample our smallest class (corecollapse) to a size between these two extremes. This
allows us to train on as much data from the majority
class as possible, while minimizing the amount of artificial data we generate for the minority class. After resampling, our training data contains 3,500 SN Ia events
and 3,500 core-collapse events in a single fold. Our test
set contains approximately 1,503 SN Ia events and 723
core-collapse events in each fold (because our full test set
is not divisible by five, each fold will contain a slightly
different number of events). The next model uses a different one of the five sub-samples for testing and the remaining re-balanced 80% of the data for training. This
process is repeated for each of the five folds, generating
five distinct random forests for our binary classification
problem. We plot pie charts comparing the classes of
our full dataset and our re-balanced samples in Figure
13.
We use the RandomizedSearchCV algorithm to determine the optimal hyperparameters for our random forest. Our final model consists of 1,400 trees without
bootstrapping, and considers a maximum of 18 features
(the square root of the total number of features) when
choosing the best split for each node. We use a maximum depth of 90 and a minimum of 2 samples required
for splitting. As with the dimensionality reduction described in §4, we scale our features to have a mean of 0
and variance of unity before classification.
5.2. Random Forest: Results
Because an event’s predicted class is determined by
consolidating the predictions of each of the trees, the

fraction of final votes belonging to each class can be
used as a classification probability. Traditionally, the
overall accuracy in a binary classification problem is determined by the fraction of events correctly classified by
a majority of trees, corresponding to a decision threshold of 50%; however, different thresholds can be selected
to prioritize particular aspects of the model. For example, a higher decision threshold will consider only the
events which are classified nearly unanimously by all of
the trees, as was the case for our star-galaxy classifier,
whereas a low decision threshold will do the opposite.
This tradeoff can be conceptualized with a Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve, which describes the
rate of true positive classifications and false positive classifications as a function of the decision threshold (from
0 to 1). The accuracy of our model, which is determined
by a majority vote, represents a single point along this
curve. The Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) quantifies the separability of our two classes, with a high AUC
indicating a model that achieves a high true positive
rate and a low false positive rate. In the limit of perfect classification, the AUC approaches unity. We have
constructed a ROC curve in Figure 14a to evaluate the
binary model described above. We also report the AUC
for each class and its standard deviation across our 5folds. We present the confusion matrix for our model
in Figure 14b, which lists the mean classification accuracy (corresponding to a probability threshold of 50%)
for each class and for the complete test set.
We find that we can predict supernova class with
∼ 70% accuracy without any spectroscopic or photometric information from the explosion itself, using exclusively host galaxy information and the angular offset
of the supernova. The model achieves an overall accuracy of 67.9% ± 1.7%, with a classification accuracy of
72% for SN Ia events. The AUC for our final model is
72% ± 2% and 72% ± 3% for SN Ia and core-collapse
events, respectively. We also achieve a SN Ia model precision of 79%. Imputing missing values using the default
mean imputation configuration of SimpleImputer from
the sklearn package results in a comparable mean accuracy and a larger standard deviation of 66.8 ± 4.6 %.
To assess the predictive power of host galaxies as a
function of redshift, we divide our events into 9 equally
spaced bins spanning 0 < z < 0.6. We divide the data
for each bin into 5 folds, re-balance our training set,
and train and test our models. Because of the small
number of observed core-collapse events at high redshift
(fewer than 100 above z = 0.3), we re-balance in each
bin by only undersampling our SNe Ia events. This prevents our training set from being dominated by simulated data. We plot the classification accuracy at each

21

Figure 13. Above. The fraction of the GHOST database
comprised by different classes of supernovae. We show the
fraction of core-collapse supernovae comprised by different
sub-types at right. Below. The total number of supernovae
within the training and testing samples for each fold of our
two-class model. We have under-sampled our largest class
(SN Ia) and over-sampled our smallest class (core-collapse) to
generate a balanced dataset for training our algorithm. We
list the number of real and augmented core-collapse events
for clarity. Due to the small number of peculiar core-collapse,
peculiar SN Ia, and SLSN events discovered to date, we are
unable to robustly classify these groups by host galaxy properties.

redshift for SNe Ia, core-collapse events, and across all
events in Figure 15.
Our mean classification accuracy increases roughly
monotonically with redshift after z > 0.1, and traces
the classification accuracy for SNe Ia because they comprise the majority of events in each bin. In addition,
our accuracy for each class in the highest redshift sample is nearly 20% higher than our classification accuracy for these classes at the lowest redshift sample.
At every redshift, we achieve a higher mean classification accuracy than random guessing. Despite the small
number of events within the highest redshift bin (107
branch-normal SNe Ia and 18 core-collapse events for
0.53 < z < 0.60), we accurately identify 90% of corecollapse events and 76.7% of SNe Ia. By removing the
events classified as core-collapse supernovae across all
folds, we increase the SN Ia fraction of our high-redshift
(0.53 < z < 0.60) sample from 85.6% to 92.2%. This
∼ 7% increase suggests that host galaxy information can
be used to increase the purity of SN Ia samples at highz, but because we are unable to associate the majority of
supernovae past z ∼ 0.6 the accuracy of reported classifications will likely decrease for events more distant than
this.

For comparison, we develop two “wishful thinking”
classifiers that randomly guess the supernova type of
each event. The first classifier guesses each class 50%
of the time, and the second guesses “SN Ia” 100% of
the time. When applied to our test sample, these classifiers achieve mean accuracies of 50% and 68% respectively. While the latter has a comparable mean accuracy to our random forest classifier, it achieves a model
precision of 68% for SNe Ia. This makes our random
forest classifier ∼ 20% more accurate than chance and
11% more precise at classifying SNe Ia than a model
trained on SN Ia event rates. This study is the first
to accurately distinguish thousands of SNe Ia and corecollapse supernovae with the photometric properties of
their host galaxies. We provide a single random forest
classifier, trained on the full GHOST database, as a submodule within the astro ghost package.
We have found across several iterations that our models trained on data spanning the full redshift range of
the database classify SNe Ia more accurately than corecollapse events. This trend is reversed in our redshiftbinned models: we classify core-collapse supernovae
more accurately than SNe Ia for the majority of our redshift samples. Although is possible that our simulated
core-collapse events within the full sample were unphysical, it is more likely that the full sample captures more
of the diversity of core-collapse events and their host environments (Kelly & Kirshner 2012). This is supported
by the wide spread of SN II in Fig. 10, although a larger
sample of events is needed to probe these host galaxies
in more detail.
The classifier’s improved accuracy with redshift is surprising, as more host galaxy information is available at
low-z. In comparing the properties of SN II and SN Ia
host galaxies in our highest redshift bin, we find that
the high-z SNe Ia extend to significantly higher θ/dDLR
values than the high-z SNe II. This parameter is the
most significant feature in our high-redshift model, suggesting it is responsible for the model’s improved accuracy. If more supernovae were incorrectly matched to
neighboring bright galaxies at high-z because their true
host galaxies are faint, they will be overwhelmingly SNe
Ia and the reported scaled offsets of this group will be
shifted upward. We nevertheless find that this effect
remains after considering only supernovae that match
their host galaxy’s redshift to within 5%.
Our database has been consolidated from multiple supernova surveys. Supernovae discovered from SDSSII are included in this analysis, which span the range
0.05 < z < 0.4. Past z ∼ 0.4, our samples consist primarily of transients from deeper surveys such
as ESSENCE (Miknaitis et al. 2007) and SNLS (Astier

22
et al. 2006), which extend past z ∼ 0.7. These high-z,
large-aperture telescope surveys allow us to probe the innermost regions of supernova host galaxies, where faint
core-collapse supernovae would typically be masked by
galactic extinction. In addition, because many of these
high-z surveys are untargeted, we expect to find more
SNe Ia in the extended halos of their host galaxies where
older stellar populations are found. This effect would
also shift the scaled angular offsets of SNe Ia upward.
We find by plotting θ/dDLR as a function of redshift that
the median scaled angular offsets of both core-collapse
and type Ia supernovae in our sample are roughly comparable for 0.0 < z < 0.35, and past this point the scaled
offsets for SNe II shift to systematically lower values.
Further, the scaled offsets for SNe Ia rapidly increase
following z ∼ 0.4 and then gradually return to a value
comparable to the low-z sample as we begin to reach the
observing limits of the high-z surveys. These trends explain both the rapid increase in classification accuracy at
z ∼ 0.4 seen in Fig. 15 and the overall increase in accuracy with redshift, as more of the low-offset core-collapse
events are considered in our analysis. Nevertheless, with
only 18 core-collapse events in our highest-redshift bin,
more events are needed to validate and further explore
these effects at higher redshifts.
As in §4.2, we can compare the redshift-corrected photometry of these classes to distinguish observational and
intrinsic differences between host galaxies. Re-running
our classifier using SDSS absolute magnitudes, we find a
mean accuracy of 70.5 ± 1.5% but a lower core-collapse
accuracy of 53.4 ± 8%. This result suggests that redshift information plays a larger role in classifying corecollapse events than SNe Ia.
The accuracy of our classification results suggests that
host features can be used to minimize contamination
within photometric SNe Ia samples. Because these photometric measurements will be already be made by upcoming surveys, this represents a low-overhead strategy
for immediately improving cosmological estimates.
We have found in section 4.1 that each of our host
features does not provide unique information, so we can
reduce the complexity of our classification model while
sacrificing minimal accuracy. We achieve this by considering only the 13 features with high loading from Figure
9 in grizy. This reduces our parameter space from 317
to 65 features. We use these features to train a new random forest model, and find an accuracy for each class
comparable to that reported for the full model.
Despite the differences in host galaxy distributions
found in Fig. 10, we are unable to construct a random forest that can accurately distinguish between rarer
sub-classes of supernovae, even after augmenting these

classes as was done for the core-collapse events. These
rarer events include SLSNe, SNe IIP, SNe IIb, and SNe
Ib/c. It is likely that there are too few of these events
for our random forest to identify meaningful relationships with their host galaxies. At present, GHOST contains under 100 SLSNe. LSST in Wide-Fast-Deep mode
is predicted to find ∼ 104 SLSNe per year (Villar et al.
2018), dramatically expanding this dataset and facilitating future studies into the host galaxies of these underrepresented classes.
Because of the strong correlations between the majority of host galaxy features, the variable importances
returned by our random forest model may not reveal
the most valuable features for supernova classification.
Further, the random forest importances presented by
scikit-learn are known to be biased 4 . We use the
package feature-selector to remove all features that
are greater than 80% linearly correlated and train a gradient boosting model for supernova classification. We
use the normalized feature importance, defined as the
percentage of times the feature is used within the model,
as our metric for feature significance. We list the ten
most significant features from our model in Fig. 16.
We have additionally calculated the permutation importance of our host galaxy features using the rfpimp
package. This method identifies the top five features
in our model to be g − r, second order moments in g
and r, ExtN Sigma in z and psf M ajorF W HM in i.
These results agree with the gradient boosting features
and emphasize the importance of color and derived morphological features.
The host galaxy parameters found to be most significant by our gradient boosting model can be grouped
into three main categories: radial offset, including θ and
θ/dDLR ; color-derived features, including 4DCD, g − r,
g −i, r −i, and i−z; and morphological features, including momentXX in g and i and ExtN Sigma in g. The
high importance of scaled radial offset indicates that supernova classes may preferentially occur at different locations throughout their host galaxies. The unscaled
radial offset also has high importance, but this is likely
a consequence of the difference in observed rates of supernova classes at different redshifts. For example, corecollapse events within GHOST are found predominantly at
low redshift, where their observed angular offsets span
a wide range of values due to the decreased distance to
the host galaxy.
The morphological features characterize the light profile of the host galaxy, which can reflect the classification
4 https://explained.ai/rf-importance/#intro

23

(a)

(b)

Figure 14. a. A receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve for our random forest classifier trained to classify SNe Ia and
core-collapse events. Shaded regions describe the sample standard deviation calculated from a 5-fold cross-validation. The
dashed line designates the performance of a model that classifies at random, and the area under the curve (AUC) for each class
is listed along with its standard deviation across the 5 folds. The total number of supernovae in the training and testing sets
(after augmentation) for each fold is listed top left. b. The confusion matrix for our classifier, showing the mean true positive
rate and mean false positive rate for each class. The overall accuracy is given at top. We accurately distinguish ∼ 70% of SNe
Ia and core-collapse events without any information from either the light curve or spectrum.

Figure 15. The SN Ia (dashed purple line), core-collapse
(dotted red line), and combined classification accuracy (solid
green line) of our random forest model as a function of redshift. Supernovae are grouped into 9 bins spanning the range
0 < z < 0.6. The mean classification accuracy increases
nearly monotonically for z > 0.1; whereas the lowest-redshift
events are classified with ∼ 60% accuracy, ∼ 80% of the
highest-redshift events are accurately classified. The mean
accuracy of the model is higher than random guessing (the
solid gray line) for every redshift bin; core-collapse classification does better than random guessing for all but one redshift
bin.

Figure 16. The ten host galaxy features with highest normalized importances in our binary supernova classification
model as determined by a gradient boosting model. The
features are ordered by importance. The features with highest importance can be broadly categorized by host galaxy
color, radial separation, and host galaxy light profile. These
features reflect previously-identified host galaxy correlations
with supernova type. All of these features are available apriori or can be calculated immediately following a triggered
event.

24
of the host galaxy along the Hubble tuning fork (van der
Wel 2008). Color features encode host galaxy metallicity, mass, and galactic star formation rate, which are
also correlated with supernova type (e.g. Hansson et al.
2012). Color is also a useful indicator of early and latetype galaxies (Strateva et al. 2001; Nair & Abraham
2010). These results suggest that the host galaxy features that are most valuable in classifying supernovae reflect many of the correlations that have been previously
identified in the literature. The large PCA loadings of
light profile metrics from §4.1 further confirm the discriminatory power of host galaxy morphology. Finally,
the color with highest importance in our model is g − r.
This color is strongly correlated with host galaxy magnitude (Fig. 8), which also has a strong loading in PCA
space.
5.3. A Comparison to Previous Classification Efforts
Using Host Galaxy Information
A similar study was undertaken by Baldeschi et al.
(2020) to distinguish SNe Ia and core-collapse events
from LOSS (Li et al. 2000) and ZTF-BTS (Fremling
et al. 2020), and these samples cover z ≤ 0.15 and
z ≤ 0.005, respectively. The number of total events
classified within each sample was ∼ 500, whereas we
classify > 10, 000 total supernovae across all five-folds
of our classification scheme. Our train and test sets
are randomly selected with replacement across folds, so
these are not each unique events; however, we have classified at minimum 2, 000 unique supernovae (the number
within a single fold). Because our analysis includes significantly more events spanning z ≤ 2, we have validated
the robustness of host-galaxy correlations for supernova
classification across a wider range of redshifts and host
galaxies than previous studies. Baldeschi et al. (2020)
also included peculiar Ia events (e.g. Ia-02cx, Ia-91T,
Ia-91bg, Ia-SC, Ia-CSM) within their Ia sample; the
sample purities for branch-normal events are unknown.
Peculiar SN Ia will be unusable for cosmological analysis because of the difficulty of standardizing their photometry. The classification accuracies presented in the
current study have only considered branch-normal SNe
Ia for classification with the motivation of studying dark
energy in upcoming synoptic surveys. Finally, Baldeschi
et al. (2020) considered only host galaxies with complete
Kron information and used g-band Kron radius in PS1DR2 to associate transients with host galaxies. Because
we have developed an association method that is faulttolerant to faulty PS1 Kron radius estimates (described
in §2.4), we are able to accurately identify a host galaxy
even when Kron radius values are incorrect or incomplete. Nevertheless, their work reflects the value of us-

ing derived host galaxy properties to classify supernovae.
This paper has considered the problem of classification
directly from observed photometry (and morphological
moments), but we will explore derived features such as
host metallicity and stellar mass in future work. Their
released database of Hubble classes and star formation
rates for all Pan-STARRS sources is ideal for extending
this work.
In constructing a supernovae classifier from host
galaxy information, Foley & Mandel (2013) found that
the most significant feature for increasing their FoM
(which prioritized SN Ia sample purity) was host morphology. This data increased the FoM by greater than a
factor of two over using no host galaxy information. This
agrees with our finding that the light profile of a host
galaxy (ExtN Sigma and mAp,i − mKron,i adds significant information for supernova classification. After morphology, Foley & Mandel (2013) find that host galaxy
color and luminosity slightly increase their FoM and increase the separation between SNe Ia and core-collapse
samples. While this is considered less significant than
morphology for maintaining pure SN Ia samples, the significance of color and luminosity in distinguishing supernova classes is supported by the results from our random
forest model. Finally, Foley & Mandel (2013) found that
radial offset information produces only marginal contributions to SN Ia sample purities. It is surprising, then,
that our random forest model uses radial offset information as its most important feature set for classification.
We hypothesize that this difference can be attributed to
our larger number of supernova events, which may show
systematic differences in radial offset that may not be
apparent in smaller low-redshift samples. In addition,
our core-collapse sample consists of a greater number of
sub-types (e.g. IIP, IIn) than were originally considered
by Foley & Mandel (2013), and these sub-types may be
more distinguishable by radial offset than SNe Ib/c, SNe
II, and SNe Ia only.
Other classifiers have accurately distinguished transient events by their postage stamps alone, and these
will inevitably include the photometric properties of the
host galaxy; however, these have typically been used
to distinguish supernovae from non-explosive transients
(Carrasco-Davis et al. 2019; Gómez et al. 2020). These
works also train neural networks on complete sequences
of images taken throughout the duration of a transient
event, and as a result their ability to accurately classify
events from real-time single-epoch observations remains
unclear. Further, the model developed by CarrascoDavis et al. (2019) requires at least three observations
in g-band for accurate recall. Although this method is
well-equipped for ZTF’s public survey cadence of ∼3

25
days in g and r, these observations will span nearly
a month of the wide-fast-deep survey’s single-band cadence. This is far too long to be leveraged for earlytime follow-up without retraining. These methods will
be more valuable for classifying events within archival
data without the need to manually extract photometric
measurements. They can also be used to validate premaximum classifications made by GHOST. In the event
that a supernova that was missed by real-time classifiers
is later discovered by archival image sequences, GHOST
can still be run in tandem with these methods to identify the host galaxy and provide a classification.
GHOST characterizes the nature of a supernova that
has already been discovered, but it cannot be used
to determine whether an event has occurred or not.
A real/bogus classifier operating on real-time postage
stamps would extend the work of Carrasco-Davis et al.
(2019) and provide a necessary pre-processing step to
the GHOST pipeline.
Calibrated aperture flux, psf F lux, adaptive source
intensity second moments, and their associated uncertainties will be released for each new source detected
by LSST within 24 hours of detection. Difference image alerts will also provide the radial offset of a transient from a likely host galaxy. From these data, color,
morphology, and radial features can be derived and
used for transient classification. From our importances
above, these measures are critical for classifying transient events with host galaxy information. In addition,
LSST will accompany source alerts with flags to characterize the “extendedness” and “spuriousness” of detected objects, and these can improve the current models for star-galaxy separation and host galaxy association, respectively. Because of the LSST baseline cadence
in a single passband, these features will only be available in ugrizy after the first ∼ 6 months of operation.
During the initial period of LSST commissioning, host
photometry can be retrieved from PS1. Our association
method runs in ∼ 1 minute, and classification adds a
negligible overhead. This is fast enough to operate on
the full LSST alert stream so that host and preliminary
class information can be provided with a source alert
well within LSST’s projected 24 hour window.
6. SUPERNOVA SIBLINGS

By determining the host galaxies of the majority of
spectroscopically confirmed supernovae, we can compare
the properties of supernova siblings: supernovae associated with the same host galaxy. Extensive work has
been done to compare the light curves of SN Ia siblings (Gall et al. 2018; Scolnic et al. 2020) and conduct
a census of supernova siblings (Guthrie 1990; Ander-

son & Soto 2013). Our pipeline identifies 304 galaxies in our sample that host 2 supernovae, 37 galaxies that host 3 supernovae, 5 that host 4 supernovae,
4 that host 5 supernovae, and 3 that host 6 supernovae. These are nearly half of the supernova siblings identified by http://www.rochesterastronomy.org/
snimages/sndupe.html. The majority of missing pairs
were dropped from our pipeline because a supernova
was located greater than 3000 from its host galaxy center; however, increasing our cone search would have increased the number of artifacts in our sample and decreased the accuracy of our matches.
For our identified siblings, we use radial offset θ to explore whether SNe II and SNe Ia probe distinct regions
of their host galaxy. For all galaxies hosting multiple
supernovae, we take the difference between the radial
offsets of two supernova siblings, δθ. Next, we generate a probability density function for δθ. We compare
δθ distributions for two samples: siblings that belong
to the same class, where both are SNe II or SNe Ia
(the matched sample); and pairs where one sibling is
a SN Ia and the other is a SN II (the nonmatched sample). The sizes of these two samples are roughly equal.
Because we are comparing the difference in θ between
matched and nonmatched siblings, we minimize the influence of different galaxy sizes, distances, and redshifts.
A Malmquist bias is present within this sample, as supernovae within nearby host galaxies will be more easily
detected than distant supernovae, especially for SNe II.
These host galaxies allow for a greater range of possible δθ values than distant galaxies, so a SN II/SN II
match will likely have a larger relative separation than
a SN Ia/SN Ia match. This effect is unlikely to mask
a systematic difference between δθ for matched and unmatched siblings.
We perform an Anderson-Darling (AD) test to compare the distributions of δθ for matched and unmatched
supernovae, and find that at > 99.8% confidence we
can reject the null hypothesis that these two samples
are drawn from the same distribution (p = 0.002). A
Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test, which weights the distribution tails less heavily than the AD test, also finds a
significant difference between these distributions at the
99% level (p = 0.01).
Wang et al. (1997) makes a similar comparison between the radial offsets (in kpc) of 197 SNe II and 246
SNe Ia using a KS test, rejecting the null hypothesis that
these two classes have the same radial distributions at
p = 10% (or at the 90% confidence level). Wang et al.
(1997) further suggests that the dominant differences between the radial offsets of these two classes arise within
the inner 6 kpc of a galaxy. To compare the inner radial

26
distributions of SNe Ia and SNe II between galaxies, we
can no longer use δθ; instead, we compare the scaled radial offset values θ/dDLR for all events within the GHOST
database. We find no significant difference in θ/dDLR
between SNe Ia and SNe II, either in the full range of
values (p = 0.47 for KS and p > 0.25 for AD) or within
the inner 10% of a supernova’s host galaxy (p = 0.57 for
KS and p > 0.25 for AD). We have found this result to be
consistent for the low-z sample (z < 0.014). We caution
that we have calculated the DLR for these galaxies using
the Kron radius reported for these objects; If this radius
is not representative of the true radius of the galaxy, it
would decrease the robustness of this comparison.
7. DISCUSSION

We have constructed the largest catalog of supernovae
and their host galaxies to date. By augmenting the
DLR method with a gradient ascent algorithm that isolates galaxy profiles directly from images, we can associate host galaxies spanning a wide range of redshifts
(0.00015 ≤ z ≤ 2) to an accuracy of > 97%. LSST
will have a maximum all-band wide-field-deep depth
of 5σ > 25.08, and the Nancy Grace Roman Space
Telescope in deep survey mode is slated to achieve a
depth per exposure of 26.2 in J and H (Hounsell et al.
2018). These programs will allow us to study supernova
host galaxies in unprecedented detail and further explore
the correlations between host galaxy and transient, but
it will also exacerbate the host galaxy association issues described in §2.4. A light profile-based association
method will allow us to leverage the strengths of these
surveys to continue to accurately associate new transients.
Our results indicate that host galaxy color and photometry can aid in supernova classification. By projecting our sample into reduced parameter spaces, we
can immediately identify visual differences between supernova host galaxies. Using a random forest classifier
trained on host galaxy information, we distinguish SNe
Ia and core-collapse supernovae with ∼ 70% accuracy.
This work builds on previous efforts by incorporating a
significantly larger number of host galaxy features than
were considered by Foley & Mandel (2013).
Our mean classification accuracy is ∼ 20% higher for
high-z events than for low-z events. This likely reflects
differences in the survey strategies used to discover supernovae in these two regimes, but at present we do not
have enough high-redshift events to statistically compare these two samples. Our publically available classifier is trained on the full dataset, which has a median redshift of 0.07. We predict comparable classification accuracies to those listed above for z < 0.6 events.

Re-training our algorithm with additional high-z host
galaxies, whether simulated or discovered in the first
few months of LSST, will ensure that our classifier is
robust for more distant events.
The host galaxy features with the most discriminatory
power are radial offset, color, and derived morphological
features. The color and morphology of a galaxy are indicative of its metallicity and star formation rate, both
of which can be used to distinguish SNe Ia and corecollapse supernovae. Accurate morphology estimates in
large surveys will be crucial for taking advantage of these
correlations for new events. Further, the importance of
radial offset suggests that a transient’s local environment may be even more predictive of supernova class
than the global properties of its host galaxy. The strong
overlap between global features of SN Ia, SLSN, and SN
Ib/c host galaxies in Fig. 9 reinforces this need for localized metrics to characterize the local environments of
supernovae and more accurately distinguish SN classes.
This study will inform the development of brokers for
the LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration (DESC).
Brokers will need to perform low-latency, accurate classification of transient events using the information provided by the real-time alerts stream. For LSST, these
alert packets will include the supernova radial offset, a
photometric redshift, and a postage stamp of the field.
After using this information to verify the host galaxy,
the broker can retrieve archival LSST (or PS1, if it is not
available) photometry for that host galaxy, calculate the
color of the host, and use the random forest model described above to predict the class of the supernova. By
augmenting this algorithm with a real-time photometric classifier such as RAPID (Muthukrishna et al. 2019),
we can ensure accurate classification pre-maximum for
a broad range of transient events.
In addition, we find a statistically significant difference
between the differential radial offsets δθ of matched (SN
Ia, SN Ia and SN II, SN II) and nonmatched (SN Ia, SN
II) supernova siblings, but we do not find a significant
difference in the scaled radial offsets θ/dDLR between
SNe Ia and SNe II. Intuitively, one might expect these
distributions to differ because core-collapse supernovae
are associated with star-forming regions and frequently
found in the arms of spiral galaxies. Our result suggests that offset alone may not sufficiently characterize
the positions of star forming regions. In addition, the
significance of radial offset in our classification model
suggests that sub-types of core-collapse events (SNe IIP,
SNe Ib/c, SNe IIn) may differ from SNe Ia in radial offset even if SNe II do not. This result underscores the
need for higher resolution imaging to assemble a more
complete picture of host galaxy-supernova interactions

27
at the local level. This result may also reflect the limitations of characterizing host galaxy morphology using its
PS1 Kron radius. As we discuss in greater detail in §2.4,
this value is unphysical or unreported for the largest and
smallest host galaxies in our sample, limiting our ability
to directly compare SN positions between these galaxies.
Finally, we find systematic differences in the host
galaxy photometry of underrepresented events such as
SLSNe, SNe IIP, and SNe IIb. By comparing restframe and absolute g-band magnitudes, we identify a
strong redshift-dependence in the rates of these events.
Archival SLSNe are found at higher redshifts than SNe
IIb, and as a result their observed host galaxies will
be fainter. This information can be used to distinguish these events and validate photometric redshift estimates.
LSST’s official strategy for host galaxy association has
not yet been finalized. We have shown that, where deep
surveys limit the ability to de-blend extended sources,
the directional light radius is unable to robustly identify supernova host galaxies. In addition, the postage
stamps associated with real-time transient alerts for
LSST are unlikely to exceed 600 x 600 . This window will
exclude many supernova host galaxies within z∼0.1 (See
Figure 6a), and make it difficult to use postage stamp
gradients for host galaxy association. The gradient ascent method outlined in this work will be a valuable
resource for validating LSST’s host galaxy associations
and proposing improvements to the pipeline.
8. FUTURE WORK

The GHOST database can facilitate future studies into
the correlations between supernovae and their host
galaxies. The LSST DESC Science Roadmap lists a vital
collaboration goal as identifying the underlying physics
of the SN-host galaxy mass correlation for cosmological
analysis. A strong correlation has been identified between local stellar mass and distance residuals for low-z
Ias, corrections for which would reduce the uncertainties placed on H0 (Jones et al. 2018b); further, a local
color step derived from 2MASS photometry of a sample of Type Ia supernovae was found to be significant to
7σ (Roman et al. 2018). A similarly significant (5.7σ)
correlation was identified as a function of specific star
formation rate (Rigault et al. 2018). Our database contains > 9, 200 SNe Ia, and by increasing the sample size
of associated SNe Ia by at least an order of magnitude
(compared to e.g. Sako et al. 2018) this data will shed
more light on these correlations.
Our tSNE results suggest there are systematic differences in the host galaxies of supernova sub-types that
we have not yet incorporated into a classification model.

These redshift-dependent differences may not be significant enough for accurate classification by themselves,
but are likely to improve the accuracy of photometric
classifiers. We will explore this possibility when developing an ensemble host photometry-SN photometry classifier in the future.
In addition, we will continue improving our gradient
ascent algorithm. We have avoided incorporating spectroscopic redshift information into the algorithm so that
the method may be automated on the alert streams of
large surveys where estimates may have large uncertainties, but it is likely that knowledge of a photo-z would
inform both the use of the method over DLR and the
selection of a relevant step size. An accurate pipeline
for host galaxy association will enable discoveries across
a broad range of time-domain studies, such as by constraining kilonova progenitor models (Jiang et al. 2020),
verifying the discovery of Tidal Disruption Events (Arcavi et al. 2016), and further uncovering the relationship
between Rapidly Evolving Transients (RETs) and their
host galaxies (Wiseman et al. 2020).
We will next explore the use of Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) to classify supernovae using postage
stamps of their host galaxies. Postage stamps encode
spatially resolved color and brightness information, such
as radial color gradients (Park & Choi 2005), that
may be more accurate in classifying transients than the
single-statistic PS1 features we have considered here.
CNNs have already achieved high accuracies distinguishing simulated SNe Ia from other supernovae (with an
AUC of 96% in a single-epoch; Kimura et al. 2017),
and the GHOST database is ideal for extending this work.
Finding the global and local correlations that can improve classification is also critical for plausibly embedding supernovae in LSST-depth postage stamps. This
simulated data will be used to train photometric classifiers in preparation for LSST, another primary goal
for LSST DESC. By extracting host galaxy features directly from postage stamps in a neural network, we will
be able to more accurately encode these correlations in
our simulated sample.
9. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Author contributions are listed below.
A. Gagliano: Software, website, and database development; writing and editing.
G. Narayan: Oversight, writing and editing.
A. Engel: Contributed software for the SN Ia and corecollapse classifier.
M. Carrasco-Kind: Contributed software for the GHOST
Viewer.

28
This paper has undergone internal review in the LSST
Dark Energy Science Collaboration. The internal reviewers were Ryan Foley, Renee Hlozek, Kaisey Mandel,
Christian Setzer, and Seth Digel. The authors thank the
internal reviewers and the anonymous referee for their
thorough reviews of this work. Each has significantly
strengthened this paper.
The DESC acknowledges ongoing support from the
Institut National de Physique Nucléaire et de Physique
des Particules in France; the Science & Technology Facilities Council in the United Kingdom; and the Department of Energy, the National Science Foundation, and
the LSST Corporation in the United States. DESC uses
resources of the IN2P3 Computing Center (CC-IN2P3–
Lyon/Villeurbanne - France) funded by the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique; the National Energy
Research Scientific Computing Center, a DOE Office
of Science User Facility supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract
No. DE-AC02-05CH11231; STFC DiRAC HPC Facilities, funded by UK BIS National E-infrastructure capital grants; and the UK particle physics grid, supported
by the GridPP Collaboration. This work was performed
in part under DOE Contract DE-AC02-76SF00515.
AG is supported by the Illinois Distinguished Fellowship, the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program under Grant No. DGE
– 1746047, and the Center for Astrophysical Surveys
Graduate Fellowship at the University of Illinois. GN’s
work on this project was partially supported by the
Lasker Data Science Fellowship at STScI, and generous startup funding from the University of Illinois. The
authors thank the Space Telescope Science Institute for
providing travel funds for AG. We are also grateful for
the support of the National Center for Supercomputing
Applications (NCSA), which houses the server that runs
the GHOST database. The authors thank Rahul Biswas,
Qinan Wang and Monika Soraisam for fruitful conversations related to this work.
The Pan-STARRS1 Surveys (PS1) and the PS1 public
science archive have been made possible through contributions by the Institute for Astronomy, the University
of Hawaii, the Pan-STARRS Project Office, the MaxPlanck Society and its participating institutes, the Max
Planck Institute for Astronomy, Heidelberg and the Max
Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics, Garching,
The Johns Hopkins University, Durham University, the
University of Edinburgh, the Queen’s University Belfast,
the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, the
Las Cumbres Observatory Global Telescope Network
Incorporated, the National Central University of Tai-

wan, the Space Telescope Science Institute, the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration under Grant No.
NNX08AR22G issued through the Planetary Science Division of the NASA Science Mission Directorate, the
National Science Foundation Grant No. AST-1238877,
the University of Maryland, Eotvos Lorand University
(ELTE), the Los Alamos National Laboratory, and the
Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation.
This research has made use of the NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database (NED), which is operated by the
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under contract with the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration. Funding for the Sloan Digital Sky Survey IV has been provided by the Alfred P.
Sloan Foundation, the U.S. Department of Energy Office
of Science, and the Participating Institutions. SDSS-IV
acknowledges support and resources from the Center for
High-Performance Computing at the University of Utah.
The SDSS web site is www.sdss.org. SDSS-IV is managed by the Astrophysical Research Consortium for the
Participating Institutions of the SDSS Collaboration including the Brazilian Participation Group, the Carnegie
Institution for Science, Carnegie Mellon University, the
Chilean Participation Group, the French Participation
Group, Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics,
Instituto de Astrofı́sica de Canarias, The Johns Hopkins University, Kavli Institute for the Physics and
Mathematics of the Universe (IPMU) / University
of Tokyo, the Korean Participation Group, Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory, Leibniz Institut für Astrophysik Potsdam (AIP), Max-Planck-Institut für Astronomie (MPIA Heidelberg), Max-Planck-Institut für
Astrophysik (MPA Garching), Max-Planck-Institut für
Extraterrestrische Physik (MPE), National Astronomical Observatories of China, New Mexico State University, New York University, University of Notre Dame,
Observatário Nacional / MCTI, The Ohio State University, Pennsylvania State University, Shanghai Astronomical Observatory, United Kingdom Participation Group,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, University
of Arizona, University of Colorado Boulder, University
of Oxford, University of Portsmouth, University of Utah,
University of Virginia, University of Washington, University of Wisconsin, Vanderbilt University, and Yale
University.
This research has made use of the following Python
software packages: Astropy (Price-Whelan et al.
2018), Matplotlib (Hunter 2007), Pandas (McKinney et al. 2010), NumPy (van der Walt et al. 2011),
Seaborn (Waskom et al. 2014), SciPy (Virtanen et al.
2020), Scikit-Learn (Pedregosa et al. 2012), and
Imbalanced-learn (Lemaı̂tre et al. 2017).

29
REFERENCES
Anderson, J. P., & Soto, M. 2013, A&A, 550, A69,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201220600
Angus, C. R., Levan, A. J., Perley, D. A., et al. 2016,
MNRAS, 458, 84, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw063
Arcavi, I., French, K. D., & Zabludoff, A. I. 2016, 228,
314.02
Astier, P., Guy, J., Regnault, N., et al. 2006, A&A, 447, 31,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20054185
Baldeschi, A., Miller, A., Stroh, M., Margutti, R., &
Coppejans, D. L. 2020, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2005.00155.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.00155
Beck, R., Szapudi, I., Flewelling, H., et al. 2020, MNRAS,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa2587
Bell, E. F., Wolf, C., Meisenheimer, K., et al. 2004, ApJ,
608, 752, doi: 10.1086/420778
Breiman, L. 2001, Machine learning, 45, 5
Cappellaro, E., Evans, R., & Turatto, M. 1999, A&A, 351,
459. https://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/9904225
Carrasco-Davis, R., Cabrera-Vives, G., Förster, F., et al.
2019, PASP, 131, 108006, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aaef12
Chambers, K. C., Magnier, E. A., Metcalfe, N., et al. 2016,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1612.05560.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.05560
Chilingarian, I. V., & Zolotukhin, I. Y. 2012, MNRAS, 419,
1727, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.19837.x
Cooke, J., Sullivan, M., Gal-Yam, A., et al. 2012, Nature,
491, 228, doi: 10.1038/nature11521
Covey, K. R., Ivezić, Ž., Schlegel, D., et al. 2007, AJ, 134,
2398, doi: 10.1086/522052
D’Andrea, C. B., Gupta, R. R., Sako, M., et al. 2011, ApJ,
743, 172, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/743/2/172
De, K., Kasliwal, M. M., Polin, A., et al. 2019, ApJL, 873,
L18, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab0aec
Dimitriadis, G., Foley, R. J., Rest, A., et al. 2019, ApJL,
870, L1, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aaedb0
Dressler, A., Lynden-Bell, D., Burstein, D., et al. 1987,
ApJ, 313, 42, doi: 10.1086/164947
Falck, B. L., Riess, A. G., & Hlozek, R. 2010, ApJ, 723,
398, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/723/1/398
Ferretti, R., Amanullah, R., Goobar, A., et al. 2017, A&A,
606, A111, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201731409
Finkbeiner, D. P., Schlafly, E. F., Schlegel, D. J., et al.
2016, ApJ, 822, 66, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/822/2/66
Foley, R. J., & Mandel, K. 2013, ApJ, 778, 167,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/778/2/167
Foley, R. J., Scolnic, D., Rest, A., et al. 2018, MNRAS,
475, 193, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx3136
Fremling, C., Miller, A. A., Sharma, Y., et al. 2020, ApJ,
895, 32, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab8943

Galbany, L., Miquel, R., Östman, L., et al. 2012, ApJ, 755,
125, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/755/2/125
Gall, C., Stritzinger, M. D., Ashall, C., et al. 2018, A&A,
611, A58, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201730886
Gómez, C., Neira, M., Hernández Hoyos, M., Arbeláez, P.,
& Forero-Romero, J. E. 2020, MNRAS,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa2973
Gómez de Castro, A. I., & Wamsteker, W. 2006,
Fundamental Questions in Astrophysics: Guidelines for
Future UV Observatories, Vol. 303
Gupta, R. R. 2013, Publicly Accessible Penn Dissertations,
758
Gupta, R. R., Kuhlmann, S., Kovacs, E., et al. 2016, AJ,
152, 154, doi: 10.3847/0004-6256/152/6/154
Guthrie, B. N. G. 1990, A&A, 234, 84
Hakobyan, A. A., Nazaryan, T. A., Adibekyan, V. Z., et al.
2014, MNRAS, 444, 2428, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stu1598
Hamuy, M. 2003, ApJ, 582, 905, doi: 10.1086/344689
Hamuy, M., Phillips, M. M., Suntzeff, N. B., et al. 1996,
AJ, 112, 2391, doi: 10.1086/118190
Hansson, K. S. A., Lisker, T., & Grebel, E. K. 2012,
MNRAS, 427, 2376,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.21659.x
Henne, V., Pruzhinskaya, M. V., Rosnet, P., et al. 2017,
NewA, 51, 43, doi: 10.1016/j.newast.2016.08.009
High, F. W., Stubbs, C. W., Rest, A., Stalder, B., &
Challis, P. 2009, AJ, 138, 110,
doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/138/1/110
Höflich, P., Krisciunas, K., Khokhlov, A. M., et al. 2010,
ApJ, 710, 444, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/710/1/444
Hosseinzadeh, G., Sand, D. J., Valenti, S., et al. 2017,
ApJL, 845, L11, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aa8402
Hounsell, R., Scolnic, D., Foley, R. J., et al. 2018, ApJ, 867,
23, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aac08b
Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing in Science and Engineering,
9, 90, doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55
Ishida, E. E. O., & de Souza, R. S. 2013, MNRAS, 430,
509, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sts650
Ivezić, Ž., Kahn, S. M., Tyson, J. A., et al. 2019, ApJ, 873,
111, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab042c
Jiang, J.-A., Doi, M., Maeda, K., et al. 2017, Nature, 550,
80, doi: 10.1038/nature23908
Jiang, Z., Wang, J., Zhang, F., et al. 2020, MNRAS,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa1989
Jones, D. O., Scolnic, D. M., Riess, A. G., et al. 2018a,
ApJ, 857, 51, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aab6b1
Jones, D. O., Riess, A. G., Scolnic, D. M., et al. 2018b,
ApJ, 867, 108, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aae2b9

30
Jones, D. O., French, K. D., Agnello, A., et al. 2019,
Transient Name Server AstroNote, 148, 1

Lunnan, R., Chornock, R., Berger, E., et al. 2015, ApJ,
804, 90, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/804/2/90

—. 2020, in prep.

Magnier, E. A., Sweeney, W. E., Chambers, K. C., et al.
2016, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1612.05244.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.05244

Karpenka, N. V., Feroz, F., & Hobson, M. P. 2013,
MNRAS, 429, 1278, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sts412
Kasliwal, M. M., Cannella, C., Bagdasaryan, A., et al.
2019, PASP, 131, 038003, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aafbc2
Kelly, P. L., Filippenko, A. V., Modjaz, M., & Kocevski, D.
2014, ApJ, 789, 23, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/789/1/23
Kelly, P. L., Hicken, M., Burke, D. L., Mand el, K. S., &
Kirshner, R. P. 2010, ApJ, 715, 743,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/715/2/743
Kelly, P. L., & Kirshner, R. P. 2012, ApJ, 759, 107,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/759/2/107
Kessler, R., Conley, A., Jha, S., & Kuhlmann, S. 2010,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1001.5210.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1001.5210
Kessler, R., Narayan, G., Avelino, A., et al. 2019, PASP,
131, 094501, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ab26f1

Mandel, K. S., Scolnic, D. M., Shariff, H., Foley, R. J., &
Kirshner, R. P. 2017, ApJ, 842, 93,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa6038
McKinney, W., et al. 2010, in Proceedings of the 9th
Python in Science Conference, Vol. 445, Austin, TX,
51–56
Miknaitis, G., Pignata, G., Rest, A., et al. 2007, ApJ, 666,
674, doi: 10.1086/519986
Miller, A. A., Magee, M. R., Polin, A., et al. 2020, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2005.05972.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.05972
Möller, A., & de Boissière, T. 2020, MNRAS, 491, 4277,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz3312

Kim, A. G., Aldering, G., Antilogus, P., et al. 2014, ApJ,
784, 51, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/784/1/51

Muthukrishna, D., Narayan, G., Mandel, K. S., Biswas, R.,
& Hložek, R. 2019, PASP, 131, 118002,
doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ab1609

Kimura, A., Takahashi, I., Tanaka, M., et al. 2017, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:1711.11526.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.11526

Nair, P. B., & Abraham, R. G. 2010, ApJS, 186, 427,
doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/186/2/427

Kulkarni, S. R., Perley, D. A., & Miller, A. A. 2018, ApJ,
860, 22, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aabf85
Lampeitl, H., Smith, M., Nichol, R. C., et al. 2010, ApJ,
722, 566, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/722/1/566
Law, N. M., Kulkarni, S. R., Dekany, R. G., et al. 2009,
PASP, 121, 1395, doi: 10.1086/648598
Leaman, J., Li, W., Chornock, R., & Filippenko, A. V.
2011, MNRAS, 412, 1419,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.18158.x
Leloudas, G., Schulze, S., Krühler, T., et al. 2015, MNRAS,
449, 917, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv320
Lemaı̂tre, G., Nogueira, F., & Aridas, C. K. 2017, Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 18, 1.
http://jmlr.org/papers/v18/16-365.html
Li, W. D., Filippenko, A. V., Treffers, R. R., et al. 2000, in
American Institute of Physics Conference Series, Vol.
522, Cosmic Explosions: Tenth AstroPhysics Conference,
ed. S. S. Holt & W. W. Zhang, 103–106,
doi: 10.1063/1.1291702
Lochner, M., McEwen, J. D., Peiris, H. V., Lahav, O., &
Winter, M. K. 2016, ApJS, 225, 31,
doi: 10.3847/0067-0049/225/2/31
LSST Science Collaboration, Abell, P. A., Allison, J., et al.
2009, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:0912.0201.
https://arxiv.org/abs/0912.0201

Narayan, G., Zaidi, T., Soraisam, M. D., et al. 2018, ApJS,
236, 9, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/aab781
Nicholl, M., Blanchard, P. K., Berger, E., et al. 2020,
Nature Astronomy, doi: 10.1038/s41550-020-1066-7
Oemler, A., J., & Tinsley, B. M. 1979, AJ, 84, 985,
doi: 10.1086/112502
Park, C., & Choi, Y.-Y. 2005, ApJL, 635, L29,
doi: 10.1086/499243
Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., et al. 2012,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1201.0490.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1201.0490
Perley, D. A., Quimby, R. M., Yan, L., et al. 2016, ApJ,
830, 13, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/830/1/13
Perlmutter, S., Aldering, G., Goldhaber, G., et al. 1999,
ApJ, 517, 565, doi: 10.1086/307221
Poznanski, D., Maoz, D., & Gal-Yam, A. 2007, AJ, 134,
1285, doi: 10.1086/520956
Poznanski, D., Chornock, R., Nugent, P. E., et al. 2010,
Science, 327, 58, doi: 10.1126/science.1181709
Prajs, S., Sullivan, M., Smith, M., et al. 2017, MNRAS,
464, 3568, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw1942
Prentice, S. J., Maguire, K., Smartt, S. J., et al. 2018,
ApJL, 865, L3, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aadd90
Price-Whelan, A. M., Sipőcz, B. M., Günther, H. M., et al.
2018, AJ, 156, 123

31
Rest, A., Garnavich, P. M., Khatami, D., et al. 2018,
Nature Astronomy, 2, 307,
doi: 10.1038/s41550-018-0423-2
Riess, A. G., Filippenko, A. V., Challis, P., et al. 1998, AJ,
116, 1009, doi: 10.1086/300499
Rigault, M., Brinnel, V., Aldering, G., et al. 2018, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:1806.03849.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.03849
Roman, M., Hardin, D., Betoule, M., et al. 2018, A&A,
615, A68, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201731425
Sako, M., Bassett, B., Becker, A. C., et al. 2018, PASP,
130, 064002, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aab4e0
Schlafly, E. F., & Finkbeiner, D. P. 2011, ApJ, 737, 103,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/737/2/103
Scolnic, D., Smith, M., Massiah, A., et al. 2020, ApJL, 896,
L13, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab8735
Scolnic, D. M., Jones, D. O., Rest, A., et al. 2018, ApJ,
859, 101, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aab9bb
Shappee, B. J., Holoien, T. W.-S., Drout, M. R., et al.
2019, ApJ, 870, 13, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaec79
Siebert, M. R., Foley, R. J., Jones, D. O., et al. 2019,
MNRAS, 486, 5785, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz1209
Slater, C. T., Ivezić, Ž., & Lupton, R. H. 2020, AJ, 159, 65,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab6166
Smith, K. W., Williams, R. D., Young, D. R., et al. 2019,
Research Notes of the American Astronomical Society, 3,
26, doi: 10.3847/2515-5172/ab020f
Sravan, N., Milisavljevic, D., Reynolds, J. M., Lentner, G.,
& Linvill, M. 2020, ApJ, 893, 127,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab8128
Strateva, I., Ivezić, Ž., Knapp, G. R., et al. 2001, AJ, 122,
1861, doi: 10.1086/323301

Street, R. A., Bowman, M., Saunders, E. S., & Boroson, T.
2018, in Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 10707, Software
and Cyberinfrastructure for Astronomy V, ed. J. C.
Guzman & J. Ibsen, 1070711, doi: 10.1117/12.2312293
Strolger, L.-G., Dahlen, T., Rodney, S. A., et al. 2015, ApJ,
813, 93, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/813/2/93
Suh, H., Yoon, S.-c., Jeong, H., & Yi, S. K. 2011, ApJ, 730,
110, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/730/2/110
Sullivan, M., Le Borgne, D., Pritchet, C. J., et al. 2006,
ApJ, 648, 868, doi: 10.1086/506137
Sullivan, M., Conley, A., Howell, D. A., et al. 2010,
MNRAS, 406, 782, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2010.16731.x
Tampo, Y., Tanaka, M., Maeda, K., et al. 2020, ApJ, 894,
27, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab7ccc
Tonry, J. L., Stubbs, C. W., Lykke, K. R., et al. 2012, ApJ,
750, 99, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/750/2/99
van der Maaten, L., & Hinton, G. 2008, Journal of machine
learning research, 9, 2579
van der Walt, S., Colbert, S. C., & Varoquaux, G. 2011,
Computing in Science and Engineering, 13, 22,
doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2011.37
van der Wel, A. 2008, ApJL, 675, L13, doi: 10.1086/529432
Villar, V. A., Nicholl, M., & Berger, E. 2018, ApJ, 869, 166,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaee6a
Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T. E., et al. 2020,
Nature Methods, 17, 261,
doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2
Wang, L., Höflich, P., & Wheeler, J. C. 1997, ApJL, 483,
L29, doi: 10.1086/310737
Waskom, M., Botvinnik, O., Hobson, P., et al. 2014,
seaborn: v0.5.0 (November 2014), v0.5.0, Zenodo,
doi: 10.5281/zenodo.12710
Wiseman, P., Pursiainen, M., Childress, M., et al. 2020,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2005.08653.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.08653
York, D. G., Adelman, J., Anderson, John E., J., et al.
2000, AJ, 120, 1579, doi: 10.1086/301513
Zhou, L., Liang, Y.-C., Ge, J.-Q., et al. 2019, Research in
Astronomy and Astrophysics, 19, 121,
doi: 10.1088/1674-4527/19/8/121

