Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. main
November 11, 2022

©ESO 2022

ASTROMER
A transformer-based embedding for the representation of light curves
C. Donoso-Oliva1, 3, 4 , I. Becker2, 4, 5 , P. Protopapas3, 5 , G. Cabrera-Vives1, 4 , Vishnu M.5 , and Harsh Vardhan5
1

Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Concepcion, Concepcion, 4070386, Chile
Department of Computer Science, Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile, Macul, Santiago 7820436, Chile
3
Inst. for Applied Computational Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
4
Millennium Institute of Astrophysics (MAS), Nuncio Monsenor Sotero Sanz 100, Providencia, Santiago, Chile
5
Univ.AI, Singapore, 050531, Singapore

arXiv:2205.01677v3 [astro-ph.IM] 10 Nov 2022

2

Received x xxx xxxx / Accepted x xxx xxxx
ABSTRACT
Taking inspiration from natural language embeddings, we present ASTROMER, a transformer-based model to create
representations of light curves. ASTROMER was pre-trained in a self-supervised manner, requiring no human-labeled
data. We used millions of R-band light sequences to adjust the ASTROMER weights. The learned representation can
be easily adapted to other surveys by re-training ASTROMER on new sources. The power of ASTROMER consists
of using the representation to extract light curve embeddings that can enhance the training of other models, such as
classifiers or regressors. As an example, we used ASTROMER embeddings to train two neural-based classifiers that use
labeled variable stars from MACHO, OGLE-III, and ATLAS. In all experiments, ASTROMER-based classifiers outperformed a baseline recurrent neural network trained on light curves directly when limited labeled data was available.
Furthermore, using ASTROMER embeddings decreases computational resources needed while achieving state-of-the-art
results. Finally, we provide a Python library that includes all the functionalities employed in this work. The library,
main code, and pre-trained weights are available at https://github.com/astromer-science
Key words. Methods: statistical, Techniques: photometric, Stars: variables

1. Introduction
Over the past decades, efforts have been made to develop
machine learning tools to analyze and discover variable phenomena in the sky. These tools will face a challenge with
the construction of the new generation of telescopes, which
will generate substantially more data than the old generation (Kremer et al. 2017). Moreover, the observations will
be deeper and more precise than ever.
With the upcoming telescopes such as the Vera C. Rubin
Observatory (Ivezić et al. 2019), periodic observations of the
a significant portion of the sky every few days will become
the norm. They will produce light curves for all the objects
in the observed fields.
Traditional machine learning methods rely on features
to explore the variable behavior of light curves. They are
based on quantities such as amplitude, period, and color
information, among others (Sánchez-Sáez et al. 2021). The
expected volume of data will present a significant challenge
to feature-based methods if applied to every measured object.
Deep learning techniques have an advantage over traditional machine learning as they do not need to pre-calculate
features, as they extract informative representations of the
data automatically (LeCun et al. 2015). Also, deep learning
Send offprint requests to: Cristobal Donoso-Oliva, e-mail:
cridonoso@inf.udec.cl

methods leverage GPU parallelization, which accelerates information extraction from the light curves.
In the last years, some of these methods have been developed with promising results. Naul et al. (2018) presented
a recurrent autoencoder to extract features from folded periodical light curves. After training, the authors fitted a
Random Forest classifier on the embedded space, outperforming models trained on pre-defined features. This model
was one of the first approaches in astronomy that used unlabeled light curves to extract characteristics from an unsupervised deep learning model. A similar idea was proposed a year later, by Tsang & Schultz (2019) which used
an autoencoder not only for classification but also for novelty detection. These approaches remain supervised, which
is problematic for training on small datasets (Charnock &
Moss (2017)).
Self-supervised models are ideal to overcome the limitations of labeled datasets, as they can generate the target values automatically without human-generated labels
(Liu et al. (2021)). Most of these methods learn representations by solving auxiliary tasks which do not require any
label, such as infilling of time series. The learned representations can be used downstream to solve other tasks, such
as classification of variable stars or regression of physical
parameters such as temperature or redshift. This learning
scheme has achieved impressive results in Natural language
processing (NLP), with Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT, Devlin et al. (2018)) beArticle number, page 1 of 15

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

ing one of the most notable examples. BERT-like models
learn to extract contextual representations using two auxiliary tasks from a dataset of raw text. In this stage, known
as pre-training, the model learns a general representation
of the data, without being specific to any particular task.
This process is the most resource-intensive part that usually takes weeks to complete, as the models as well as the
datasets are large. After this stage is complete, the model
only needs a few hours of further training to adjust the
weights to a more specific domain, in a stage known as finetuning. Once finalized, BERT is used as the initial stage of
a new model. This scheme enables BERT-based models to
achieve state-of-art performance.
The main components of BERT are the self-attention
layers (Vaswani et al. (2017)), that codify similarities between words in the input sentence. These layers can be
computed efficiently in parallel, in contrast to the sequential behavior of recurrent neural networks. Recently, some
attention-based works have been proposed in astronomy,
showing competitive results with the state-of-the-art (Allam Jr & McEwen 2021, Pimentel et al. 2022, Pan et al.
2022).
Following the advances on NLP to treat sequential
data, representation learning and self-supervised training
strategies, we present ASTROMER, a self-supervised model
to extract a general representation of astronomical light
curves.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
1. We introduce ASTROMER, a self-supervised model
that creates light curves representations taking advantage of the massive unlabeled volume of astronomical
data.
2. Using ASTROMER representations can match or decrease the number of epochs needed to train downstream
models, such as classifiers of variable stars.
3. We empirically demonstrate the benefits of using pretrained representations when training classifiers on
small datasets. Using less than 100 samples per class,
we significantly overcome an Long-short term memory
(LSTM) trained on light curves directly.
4. We provide a python library that includes pre-trained
models and the necessary infrastructures to fine-tune
and obtain domain specific embeddings.
5. Sharing pre-trained models by the community to
save computational resources, decreasing C02 emissions
while improving the performance of automatic learning
models.
Furthermore, we aim to create different versions of ASTROMER, just as BERT has many variations depending
on the target (Polignano et al. (2019), Liu et al. (2019),
de Vries et al. (2019), Moradshahi et al. (2019), Masala
et al. (2020), Vunikili et al. (2020)).

2. Problem Statement
Let X ∈ RL×dx be a single-band light curve where dx is
the number of features with L observations over time. In
this case, every observation consists of dx = 2: the magnitude and the Modified Julian Date (MJD), where the
observations occur. Naturally, the number of observations
and times vary between different stars, and it strongly depends on the survey science goals. In this representation,
Article number, page 2 of 15

the maximum number of points in the light curves remains
fixed even if some of them are shorter than L, in which case
we perform zero padding and masking.
The main objective, is to train a model f (X, DA , θ) on
a massive set of light curves DA from a given survey A,
with trainable parameters θ. In particular, we propose to
use learned representations of a transformer-based encoder
to create embeddings Z ∈ RL×dk representing the objects’
variability in dk -dimensional space. We can fine-tune the
model’s weights to adapt to other surveys and use it to
solve downstream tasks, such as classification or regression.

3. Methods
In this section, we describe the main components of ASTROMER, which belong to the Transformer neural network
proposed by Vaswani et al. (2017). In particular, we focus
on two processes: the self-attention block and the positional
encoding (PE). Both methods are effective to capture relationships between observations to encode light curves.
3.1. Self-Attention Block
Vaswani et al. (2017) introduced the self-attention mechanism as an alternative to the classical attention technique
based on Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). The idea is
to quantify relationships between observations without conditioning the operations to follow a sequential order. Thus,
unlike RNNs, self-attention blocks can be executed in parallel, being more efficient and faster to train.
An attention block consist of multiple self-attention
heads, that compute the similarities of every input within
the sequence to each other. In other words, every head
measures the relationship between pairs of observations;
the more an observation affects the other, the more attention the model pay. As shown in Equation 1, we perform
a weighted sum over the input values Vi to obtain the attention matrix Zi using learnable query-key compatibilities
(Qi K>
i ).


Qi K>
Zi = softmax √ i Vi ,
(1)
dk
Queries, keys, and values (Qi , Ki , Vi ) are input transformations such that,
Qi = XWiq , Ki = XWik , and Vi = XWiv .

(2)

with Wiq , Wik and Wiv trainable weight matrices of the i-th
head and dk a hyper-parameter specifying the embedding
size
√ of each self-attention head. The normalization factor
dk in the denominator scales the variance of the product,
while the softmax bounds the values to represent a multinomial probability distribution.
The final attention vector is the normalized concatenation of {Z0 , .., Zi , ..., Z#heads } the output from every ith head in the block. Figure 1 illustrates the self-attention
block.
3.2. Positional Encoding (PE)
Light curves are sequences of brightness measurements as a
function of time, generally not equally spaced. The cadence
of a survey is given by the time interval between observations, which is often non-periodic.

C. Donoso-Oliva et al.: ASTROMER

−1.0

Concatenate

0

Normalize

−0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

200

250

25

Time steps

50

Scaled dot-product
SelfAttention
Heads

75
100
125
150
175
0

Fig. 1. Self-attention block diagram. Each observation vector
xl ∈ X (denoted by solid circles) is projected into three vectors:
(k)ey, (q)uery, and (v)alue. Then their similarities are computed
by the scaled dot-product between vectors according to Equation
1.

Temporal information is essential to characterize light
curves since they bring information about the variability of
a particular object. For example, RR Lyrae and Delta Scuti
stars have short periods, ranging from hours to days, while
the periods of type II Cepheids and Long Period Variables
can be months or years.
By construction, self-attention layers do not take into
account the temporal information of light curves when
learning similarities between the observations. In other
words, any re-ordering of the magnitudes within a sequence
would produce the same attention vector.
A traditional way to include temporal information during self-attention learning consists of modifying the input
to incorporate the relative positions into the same vector.
We create a representation for the time and add that information to the brightness representation. Note that the
positions range from 0 to L-1, where L is the length of the
light curve.
In this work, we adjust a classical positional encoder
used by Vaswani et al. 2017, to work with the time domain of the light curves1 . The PE projects an embedding
that encodes relative positions and it is consistent to any
transformation of them, no matter the number of observations or the first day in MJD where the object began to be
observed. It consists of trigonometric functions that codify
each observational time tl directly, from the l-th observation at different wj frequencies.

P Ej,tl =
1

sin (tl · ωj )
cos (tl · ωj )

j is even
j is odd

(3)

We based our implementation on tensor2tensor code (Tensorflow 2022) as it achieved a better validation RMSE after pretraining than using the original implementation

50

100
150
PE dimension

Fig. 2. Resulting positional embedded space from the
F_1.4175.3433 MACHO object.

In Equation 3, j ∈ [0, ..., dpe − 1], where dpe is the PE
dimensionality and wj the angular frequency defined as
ωj =

1
.
10002j/dpe

(4)

Trigonometrical functions are a natural choice to capture periodic behavior while bringing unique values within
[−1, 1], which work efficiently on GPUs (Patel (2020)). The
sine and cosine functions take d/2 different angular frequencies, spanning wavelengths from 2π to 2π × 10002 . We
make the same remarks as in the original paper regarding
the function used. A non-trainable PE is enough to achieve
reasonable results, simplifying the network. The value of
1000 gave the best results, rather than the original 10000.
The angular frequencies are indexed by the PE dimension
number. Larger frequencies are given by the smaller PE
dimensions while the smaller frequencies are given by the
larger PE dimensions. Figure 2 shows the resulting PE
given the sequence of times of the MACHO light curve
F_1.4175.3433. At high frequencies, the PE shows high
variability across all the time steps, which shows dynamic
behavior. In contrast, lower frequencies show low variability.
The PE relates directly to the objects under study. Since
the periods of variable stars typically range from 0.1 to 1000
days (Catelan & Smith 2015) the PE should be sensible to
periods in this range. To capture short periods, the minimum wavelength should be 2 × 0.1. In practice, the survey’s cadence conditions the shortest period we can study.
Moreover, most objects will not show variability for periods larger than 1000 days. As shown in Figure 2, the PE
doesn’t show any change across the time-steps.

4. Proposed Solution
Here we introduce and describe ASTROMER, a
transformed-based model capable of producing embeddings
from light curves. Embeddings summarize photometric
data according to a learned representation that can be
Article number, page 3 of 15

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

Encoder

Input

easily adapted to new data by retraining (or fine-tuning)
the model’s weights. In particular, we take inspiration
from BERT (Devlin et al. (2018)), a self-supervised trained
model that does not need human-based annotations to
learn representations of the input data.
In the following sections, we explain the main modules
and objectives of the proposed model. Before describing
the component of the model, we motivate the architecture
by describing the target task in Section 4.1. Next, Section
4.2 presents a general overview of the architecture, where
we introduce the ASTROMER modules. Finally, the last
sections detail the inner mechanisms of encoding (Section
4.3) and decoding (Section 4.4) light curves.
4.1. Target task: Modeling of masked light curves

v
u
u
Loss = t

N −1 L−1
1 XX
mil (xil − x̂il )2 ,
N − 1 i=0

(5)

l=0

where N is the number of examples, and L is the length of
the input sequences, equal for all examples. Notice that the
loss function containing the actual observation xil and the
prediction x̂il is equivalent to the root-mean-square error
(RMSE). In equation 5, the mask vector mi only allows
summing over the masked values’ error; nevertheless, the
model reconstructs the entire sequence.
4.2. Model Architecture
ASTROMER has an encoder-decoder architecture, as
shown in Figure 3. Input samples are fixed-length light
curves of L = 200 observations with two descriptors each:
observation times and magnitudes. The first part of the encoder is tasked to compute the PE, which receives the time
values at each step and projects them into vectors of 256
dimensions. The next step consists of adding magnitudes to
the PE without interfering with the temporal encoding. As
shown in Figure 3, we train a feed forward network (FNN)
without hidden layers that transform each magnitude to a
vector of size 256. Notice the dimension of the FFN match
the size of the positional embedding. In order to not alter
the temporal encoding, the FNN should learn to project
brightness information in a way that can be summed with
the constant part of the PE, i.e., after the 100-th dimension
Article number, page 4 of 15

Magnitudes

Positional
Embedding

Feed Forward
.

Self-Attention Block
.

Self-Attention Block
.

Representation

Decoder

ASTROMER aims to learn representations that summarize
and characterize the light curve’s domain. It does by reconstructing the input light curve from a sub-sample of observations. The embedding should be as general as possible to
help downstream tasks, such as classification or regression.
In this sense, the model needs to adjust its weights to create a vector that is informative enough to recover the input
light curve.
In order to force the model to learn contextual information, we hide a random subset of magnitudes within the
sequence, and reconstruct them using the remaining part of
the light curve. Hidden elements are informed to the model
by a mask vector mi that is different for every i-th light
curve sample. The loss function then takes the form,

Observation
Times (MJD)

Feed Forward
.

Reconstructed magnitudes

Fig. 3. ASTROMER architecture

in Figure 2 2 . After adding the projected magnitudes and
the PE, the new input is a matrix of 200 × 256.
The core of ASTROMER takes place on the two selfattention blocks. Each block contains four heads with 64
neurons each. The final representation is the normalized
concatenation of the heads of the last block. Then, the resulting embedding is a collection of 200 vectors of size 256,
describing the attention of every observation to each other.
Notice that dpe = dk #heads = 256.
In the decoder, we take the representation to build
the model’s output, which during the pre-training consist of a linear feed-forward network with no hidden layers that reconstructs the input magnitudes. Although the
decoder presented in Figure 3 is exclusive for pre-training
ASTROMER, we can use different decoding layers focusing
on other downstream tasks.
4.3. Learning representations
ASTROMER uses self-attention blocks to transform light
curves into embeddings via learnable parameters. As mentioned in Section 4.1, we train ASTROMER to predict a
subset of masked observations using the concatenated attention vector at the end of the encoder. The embeddings
must capture enough information to reconstruct magnitudes using only the surrounding local context of the hidden
observations.
In order to exclude the masked observations from the
self-attention blocks, we make zeros on all the dimensions
associated with the hidden elements. Therefore, by modi2

We confirm the assumption in Appendix A, where the model
-after training- learned to project magnitudes on the ∼ 200-th
dimension.

C. Donoso-Oliva et al.: ASTROMER

fying Equation 1 we obtain,


9
Qi K>
i + (−10 )M
√
Zi = softmax
Vi ,
dk

(6)

where M is a binary matrix that is 1 on masked positions
and 0 otherwise. The M matrix is dynamically created before the encoder. Notice that for the points in the light
curve that are hidden (i.e. for which M is 1), the value of
the softmax function will be close to zero, making Zi close
to zero. In other words, when the observation is masked, its
assigned predicted value will be zero, which represents no
attention.
In this work, we mask 50% of the total number of observations per light curve. Notice M should be reshaped to
L×L
. Figure 4 shows an
match the square matrix Qi K>
i ∈R
example of a 10-observations input.
Inputs
Attention
Mask

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

0

1

Fig. 4. Preliminary input example with 50% of masking. ASTROMER aims to predict masked observations (denoted by 1’s)
using only the attention associated with zero-tagged elements.

During training, the mask M provides the model with
information about the observations to be predicted. The
model can only focus on the target magnitudes and forget
contextual information about unmasked inputs. To avoid
learning biased representations conditioned by the masking
information only, Devlin et al. 2018 proposed to replace a
subset of masked values with random and real elements.
In practice, we turn 20% of the masked values from 1 to 0
while replacing its associated magnitudes with random values from the same sequence. Similarly, we make another
20% of the masked values visible but this time without
changing their magnitudes. The unmasked values are still
considered in the loss function as they are part of 50% of
the initial masked elements. Figure 5 shows the final composition of the input.

via two self-attention blocks that capture similarities between observations and then output the attention-based
embeddings.
4.4. Decoding embeddings
The decoder is essential to adjust the encoder weights. The
output conditions the purpose of the embedded representation. Despite considering only masked values in the loss
function, the decoder reconstructs the entire sequence of
magnitudes. As we explained in Section 4.1, using an mask
vector, we give a value of zero to the observations that are
not part of the loss.
The embedding is a collection of 200 vectors (the length
of the input sequence) of size 256 (model dimensionality).
Every vector describes the relationship between a particular
observation and the rest of the sequence. In order to recover
the original magnitude, we apply a feed-forward network
without hidden layers and no activation on all the vectors
of size 256 separately. Although we transform every vector
separately, the network weights remain the same.
Finally, it is important to mention that the decoder
only works during the pre-training and fine-tuning of ASTROMER. After that, we usually use the encoder along
with a new decoder specializing in another specific task,
such as the classification of variable stars. At this step, the
encoder can also be trained together with the new decoder.
However, the encoder cannot change drastically, as it would
forget the learned representations.

5. Data description
This section describes the data involved in the pre-training
and fine-tuning of the ASTROMER model. Every light
curve contains magnitudes and observation times in Modified Julian Date (MJD).
ASTROMER takes advantage of a massive set of light
curves, not necessarily labeled. However, to evaluate a
downstream task (i.e., classification), we use catalogs of
variable stars with their corresponding labels. This work
simulates the science case of having a small subset of labeled samples and employs them to fine-tune the model
even when the class information is unnecessary.

Inputs

5.1. Unlabeled dataset
Attention
Mask

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

0

1

Loss
Mask

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

0

1

Fig. 5. Final input composition. Following the example in Figure 4, 20% of the masked values are replaced by random magnitudes while changing the 1’s in the attention mask vector to 0’s.
Similarly, we make another 20% of the masking visible, keeping the actual observations. Doted line squares indicate both
random and real observations. At this point, we should keep a
second mask containing the initial 50% masked values to evaluate the loss function.

Having defined the mask vector, we initiate the forward
pass of the encoder by transforming input times and magnitudes to a 256 vector that mixes temporal and brightness
information. Finally, we pass the combined input sequences

R-band light curves of the Massive Compact Halo Object
survey (MACHO; Alcock et al. (2000)) were collected from
the Galactic Bulge (Fields 1 and 10), and the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC, Fields 101-104). The photometry was
taken as it is provided, without doing any additional processing.
Given the nature of photometric observations, the observed flux of every star will exhibit some kind of variability,
such as the intrinsic observational noise. As such, we cannot
expect every star to be variable. Even though non-variable
and noisy data can be helpful to regularize weights (Bishop
(1995)), we discard some of the light curves that show
white noise behavior (i.e., |Kurtosis| > 10, |Skewness| >
1, and Std > 0.1). Removing white noise samples avoids
training on a dataset dominated by irrelevant information
while keeping variable objects that might contain informative variability. After this filtering process, 1 529 386 light
Article number, page 5 of 15

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main
Table 1. MACHO catalog distribution.

0.6

MACHO (PT)
MACHO

Density

0.25
0.20

0.4

0.15
0.10

0.2

0.05
0.00

−20

0
Magnitude

20

0.0

1

10
∆time [days]

20

Fig. 6. Comparison between labeled and unlabeled pre-training
(PT) MACHO dataset. Continuous line represent the labeled
MACHO dataset containing variable stars from Alcock et al.
2003. [Left] Distribution of light curves magnitudes. [Right] Distribution of the differences between observation times.

curves are left, with a cadence mean of 2.9±17.3 days, which
fits the lower bound of the PE wavelengths mentioned at
the end of Section 3.2.
5.2. Labeled datasets
We employ 20 894 labeled variable stars from the MACHO
survey (Alcock et al. (2003)) to fine-tune and evaluate the
downstream task. Table 1 shows the class distribution.
Like the unlabeled dataset, this catalog contains objects
from the Large Magellanic Cloud. Consequently, it contains
light curves quite similar to the pre-training ones. However,
labeled objects come from all the survey’s fields, while the
pre-training dataset is a subset (Field 1, 10, 101-104). Figure 6 shows the distribution of magnitudes and observational times difference (∆time) from the labeled and unlabeled (PT) datasets. In the left histogram, we can see
the PT dataset overlaps one of the modes from the labeled
dataset distribution. Similarly, distributions of delta times
follow the same trend along the x-axis. However, they are
slightly different for values of delta time greater than one
day, where a greater density from the labeled dataset is
observed. The labels were updated to conform to modern
classifications. In particular, we group the LPV classes into
one category and remove the categories "RR Lyrae and
GB blends" and "RRe". The former are excluded because
of their small sample size, and the latter because RRe are
not considered a sub-class on its own based on later studies
(Catelan (2004)).
We also tested ASTROMER on the Optical Gravitational Lensing Experiment (OGLE-III; Udalski (2004)) and
ATLAS Heinze et al. (2018) catalogs of variable stars. The
OGLE-III data used was selected by Becker et al. (2020)
and contains 358 288 labeled variable stars and correspond
to I-band light curves with mean cadence of 3.8±14.6 days.
Table 2 shows its class distribution. The OGLE-III catalog
is chosen because its observations are not captured in the
same filter as MACHO but close to its wavelength range,
as shown in Table 3.
The ATLAS dataset, published by Heinze et al. (2018)
contains labeled and unclassified objects as well as a dubious class which amounts to roughly 10% actual variable
stars and 90% instrumental noise, according to their estimates. From this dataset, 422 630 light curves are used,
measured in the orange passband, as seen in Table 4, with
Article number, page 6 of 15

Tag
Cep_0
Cep_1
EC
LPV
RRab
RRc
Total

Class Name
Cepheid type I
Cepheid type II
Eclipsing binary
Long period variable
RR Lyrae type ab
RR Lyrae type c

# of sources
1182
683
6824
3046
7397
1762
20 894

Table 2. OGLE-III catalog distribution

Tag
EC
ED
ESD
Mira
OSARG
RRab
RRc
SRV
cep
dsct
Total

Class Name
Eclipsing binary
Detached Binary
Semi-detached Binary
Mira
Small-amplitude red giant
RRLyra type ab
RRLyra type c
Semi-regular variable
Cepheid
Delta Scuti

# of sources
6862
21 503
9475
6090
234 932
25 943
7990
34 835
7836
2822
358 288

Table 3. Surveys and the filters used in this work.

Survey
MACHO(1)
OGLE(2)
ATLAS(3)

Filter Name
R
I
orange

λmin ◦A
6300
7270
5620

λmax ◦ A
7600
8750
8200

Notes. In Szymański et al. (2011) is noted that OGLE-III and
OGLE-IV don’t have the same I filters, exhibiting a wide transparency “wing” towards the infrared part of the spectrum. Although different, we use Udalski et al. (2015) numbers as a reference, as they are intended to show the approximate ranges of
the filters.
References. (1)Alcock et al. (1999), (2)Udalski et al. (2015),
(3)Tonry et al. (2018)

Table 4. ATLAS catalog distribution

Tag
CB
DB
Mira
Pulse
Total

Class Name
Close Binaries
Detached Binary
Mira
RR Lyrae, δ-Scuti, Cepheids

# of sources
80 218
28 767
7370
25 021
141 376

a mean cadence of 4.7 ± 19.1 days. The reported classes
are grouped to obtain labels similar to the other datasets.
In particular, we group CBF and CBH into Close binaries
and DBF and DBH into Detached binaries. We do not use
the remaining objects, as their labels are based on Fourier
analysis and do not correspond exactly to astrophysical categories.

C. Donoso-Oliva et al.: ASTROMER
0.19

200

Train
Validation
Test

0.18

RMSE

0.17

Random
window

Max. Starting
point

Fig. 7. Windows sampling diagram. The rectangle represents
the entire light curve whose length is Lreal . The dashed line denotes the sampled windows of size 200 observations. Windows
are randomly generated along the light curve. However, We constrain the starting point to be smaller than Lreal − 200.

5.3. Preprocessing
Neural networks must work with tensors holding equallength samples. It is not the case of light curves that differ on the number of measurements. As such, it is necessary to set a maximum number of observations for all sequences, padding with zero values if necessary. Since we do
not want to constrain the encoder to learn from long series
exclusively, and 99.52% of the unlabeled dataset is longer
than 200 (see Appendix B), we set 200 as the maximum
light curve length to be fed to the model. If the light curve
is longer than 200, we sample temporal windows starting
from a random position, at least 200 observations behind
the last measurement. Figure 7 shows a diagram that exemplifies the process. On the other hand, if the light curve
has less than 200 observations, we pad it with zero values
after the last point in order to obtain a sequence of length
200. Those filler observations are masked during training
to be excluded from both the attention vector and the loss
function.
After generating windows, we independently subtract
the mean from each sample. It implies both magnitude and
time vectors have zero-mean. We do not scale windows by
their standard deviation, either magnitudes or time. Scaling
by time dispersion would lose some of the interpretability
for the positional encoder. Standardizing magnitudes may
lose amplitude-related information, important to discriminate between some classes.

6. Training Strategy
The following sections describe the training strategy consisting of two steps: pre-training and fine-tuning. In the
pre-training, 60% of the unlabeled samples are used for
training, 20% for validation, and 20% for testing. Alternatively, we set 100 samples per class of the labeled dataset to
create the test set for evaluating the fine-tuning step. The
rest of the labeled dataset is divided into 80% and 20% for
training and validation, respectively. Recall that the pretraining dataset is different from the labeled ones, so the
testing samples used to evaluate the finetuning are never
seen by ASTROMER.
Additionally, we study the scientific case of having small
target datasets to fine-tune and perform downstream tasks.
Therefore, we do not change our 100 samples per class test
set but only the training and validation subsets. First, we
sample 20, 50, 100, and 500 objects per class from each
labeled dataset. Then we divide them by 80/20 for training
and validation. We aim to see the impact of the number of

0.16
0.15
Test: 0.148
0

200

400
600
Number of Epochs

800

1000

Fig. 8. Pre-training learning curves using MACHO unlabeled
dataset.

samples when adjusting pre-trained weights on a different
survey.
6.1. Pre-training
We implemented ASTROMER using Tensorflow 2 (Abadi
et al. 2015). Both pre-training and the other experiments
can be reproduced by following the official implementation
on Github3 .
The pre-training constitute the first stage of representation learning. It defines the preliminary data requirements,
such as cadence and filter, that condition other target domains. In this case, we use the massive unlabeled dataset
from the MACHO survey presented in Section 5.1.
ASTROMER weights are initialized using the Xavier
uniform initializer (Glorot & Bengio (2010)). Training big
models such as ASTROMER uses a large amount of hardware resources and computational time. Despite this, once
the weights are adjusted, they can be shared, avoiding retraining ASTROMER from scratch.
As mentioned in Section 5.3, the light curves are split
into windows of 200 consecutive observations, increasing the
effective number of training samples to 6 201 030. An epoch
is completed after training in all samples once, in batches of
5000. We used Adam (Kingma & Ba (2014)) with learning
rate of 10−3 .
The training performance is evaluated on the validation
dataset and the results on the test set. Early stopping is
used to stop the training after 40 epochs without improving
the validation loss. Once the training is finished, the weights
corresponding to the lowest RMSE are saved.
Figure 8 shows the learning curves of the training process associated with the architecture in Figure 3. We also
trained on smaller models of 64 and 128 attention sizes.
However, we chose the 256-dimensional setting as it reached
the minimum validation loss on the unlabeled dataset. The
model achieved the lowest RMSE close to epoch 1000 4 , obtaining an RMSE of 0.148 on the testing samples (dotted
line).
3
4

https://github.com/astromer-science
∼ 10 days training on a Nvidia A100 GPU
Article number, page 7 of 15

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main
Table 5. Fine-tuning results.

# Epochs
970
115
147
244

# Time
9 days 17 hrs
23 min
9 hrs 58 min
1 day 8 hrs

RMSE
-/0.15
0.09/0.10
0.07/0.22
0.06/0.08

Notes. As a reference, the first row shows the performance
of the pre-trained model used to initialize weights in the finetuning. From the second row forward, the first column indicates
the name of the labeled dataset used to fine-tune ASTROMER.
The second and third columns show the number of epochs and
training time the models spend to converge. The last column is
the testing RMSE evaluated on the fine-tuned (left) and pretrained model (right). For the fine-tuning metrics, we employ
balanced testing with 100 objects per class from each labeled
dataset

OGLE-III

ATLAS

2 × 10−1

RMSE

Dataset
MACHO (PT)
MACHO
ATLAS
OGLE-III

MACHO

.

10−1

6 × 10−2

20

50

100
500
Samples per class

All

Fig. 9. Test RMSE from models fine-tuned on subsets of labeled
datasets.

6.2. Fine-tuning

Baseline

LSTM+ATT

MLP+ATT

After pre-training on the MACHO unlabeled dataset, the
model has learned much of the variability patterns of the
light curves. However, it is still necessary to incorporate
downstream task-related information. In this work, we use
catalogs of variable stars described in Section 5.2 to finetune the attention-based embeddings.
The loss function and self-supervised strategy remain
the same (i.e., RMSE and masked self-attention technique).
Similarly, the same hyper-parameters from the pre-training
stage are used.
Table 5 shows the number of epochs and total time to
fine-tune ASTROMER on each labeled dataset using all
samples, comparing it to the pre-training stage. A significant difference to the pre-training time is evident. The finetuned models converge faster depending on their similarities
and the number of examples. For instance, the model finetuned on ATLAS light curves takes more time than the one
trained on the MACHO labeled dataset. It is principally due
to the survey differences and the number of samples that
allow the model to get much lower RMSE than the MACHO labeled dataset. At the same time, similar behavior
is observed on the OGLE fine-tuning. However, the minor
improvements in OGLE’s RMSE suggest the training time
is highly dominated by the significant number of samples
in the catalog (see Table 2).
On the other hand, Figure 9 shows the RMSE for the
models fine-tuned on smaller datasets of 20, 50, 100, and
500 labels per class. The testing set contains the same 100
objects per class, independent of the training subsets. We
can see a descending trend in the RMSE while increasing
the number of samples in the fine-tuning, which is expected.
However, there is not much improvement along the training
subsets in the MACHO labeled dataset since it comes from
the same survey as the pre-training light curves. Validation
learning curves associated with the training process in all
datasets can be found in Appendix C.

Light curve

Light curve

Light curve

ASTROMER
(660,736)

ASTROMER
(660,736)

7. Specific Task: Classification
ASTROMER is designed as a general embedding extractor,
that can be fine-tuned to solve downstream tasks such as
classification or regression. In this work, we cover the problem of classifying variable stars from different surveys. As
Article number, page 8 of 15

ReLU (1024)

Total

LSTM (256)

LSTM (256)

LSTM (256)

LSTM (256)

ReLU (256)

Linear
(Num. Classes)

Linear
(Num. Classes)

Linear
(Num. Classes)

793,610

1,054,218

922,378

: Dropout of 0.3

ReLU (512)

: Batch normalization

Fig. 10. Classifiers architectures. Architecture names with the
+ATT tag refer to models trained on ASTROMER embeddings.
In contrast, the Baseline uses only the light curves for training.
The number in parenthesis is the number of units from the corresponding layer. Notice that the 256 in the LSTM corresponds
to the states’ size of the RNN. ReLU and Linear corresponds
to the activations for each feed-forward layer. The dimensionality of the last linear layer depends on the number of classes
from each labeled dataset. The total number of parameter at
the bottom does not include the ASTROMER size.

explained in Section 6, the model is fine-tuned in subsets
of 20, 50, 100, and 500 samples per class, as well as using
the full catalog (See Section 5). Fine-tuned models are then
used to transform light curves into attention-based embeddings. In practice, we use ASTROMER at the beginning of
the classifiers as an additional layer (see Figure 10).
We selected a baseline model from the literature
(Donoso-Oliva et al. (2021)) to compare the benefits of
using the embeddings as opposed to other deep learning
approaches. It consists of two layers of Long Short Term
Memory (LSTM) with a memory cell and hidden state of
256 units each. Following the original architecture, we normalize each recurrent layer’s output (Ba et al. 2016) and
then apply a dropout (Semeniuta et al. 2016) of 0.3 over

C. Donoso-Oliva et al.: ASTROMER

them. We do not validate this architecture since it was already tested in the previous work. However, we looked for
the best learning rate on MACHO light curves since we
changed conditions, such as the batch size and normalization techniques. As shown in Appendix D, we confirm that
a 10−3 learning rate achieved the best performance in terms
of the validation error. In the results shown in Figure 10,
we employed the same LSTM architecture but training with
ASTROMER embeddings.
In addition to the LSTM classifier, we tested a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP+ATT in Figure 10) with three
feed-forward hidden layers of 1024, 512, and 256 neurons,
and used a Rectified Linear activation function (ReLU) in
each of them. Since MLPs cannot process time, we use the
average along the steps dimension (L = 200) of the embedding matrix5 . By doing this, we collapse all the encoded
observations in a single vector of size 256 that fits the input
dimensionality of the first hidden layer of the MLP+ATT
classifier (Feed-Forward layer with 1024 units from Figure
10).
For small datasets, freezing the weights of ASTROMER
allows to optimize a classifier without training a huge number of weights. The ASTROMER encoder can also be
trained in tandem with the classification network, to better
tune weights to solve a specific task, which can be seen as
another fine-tuning step. The following experiments evaluate these two approaches, i.e., training and non-training of
the encoder layer of ASTROMER.
To measure the classification performance, we use the
F1 score metric,
F1 =

1
K

K−1
X
k=0

2×

Precisionk × Recallk
Precisionk + Recallk

(7)

where K is the number of classes, and
Recallk =

TPk
TPk
Precisionk =
.
TPk + FNk
TPk + FPk

(8)

In Equation 8, TP, FN, and FP are true positives, false
negatives, and false positives cases, respectively. Intuitively,
the precision score identifies how many predicted classes are
actually valid, and the recall indicates the number of objects
in the testing set the model could identify correctly.
Figure 11 shows the scores obtained by the classifiers
by (a) freezing the encoder and (b) training the encoder.
In addition, a third case (c) is included where all the light
curves in the dataset were used to perform fine-tuning, but
still doing the classification on the smaller subsets. As in
experiment (b), the third column allows gradients to flow
into the ASTROMER encoder while training the classifiers.
These three scenarios explore often-used strategies when
implementing pre-trained models.
The results show that models trained on ASTROMER
embeddings perform better than the Baseline in MACHO
and OGLE-III across all the experiments. For ATLAS, the
difference is smaller but not worse than the Baseline. In
general, the LSTM trained on attention vectors performs
better than the MLP+ATT. However, the MLP+ATT outperforms the Baseline and approaches the LSTM performance as the number of samples per class is increased, in
all datasets.
5

We also tried taking the first, last, and arbitrary attention
vectors to feed the input of MLP. However, the results were not
better than using the average.

Note that in (c), even fine-tuning with all the light
curves, the score improvement is marginal compared to (b).
Similarly, minor improvements can be seen in the classification metrics when optimizing the encoder layer instead
of freezing it -i.e., columns (b) and (c) in Figure 11. The
MLP+ATT classifier shows the most notorious gain when
training with more than 100 samples.
We evaluate the improved learning speed when using
ASTROMER. Figure 12 shows the validation loss associated with the best classifier among the three folds for each
dataset and the training scenarios -i.e., freezing (a) and
training (b) the ASTROMER encoder. We evaluate learning speed on the most significant subset, which contains 500
objects per class.
Attention-based models generally take fewer epochs to
achieve better results than the Baseline. When the encoder
stays frozen, the validation curve of the LSTM+ATT is significantly shorter than the other methods, achieving a high
F1 score, as shown in Figure 11. In contrast, when training
the encoder, the LSTM+ATT takes almost the same number of epochs as the Baseline. However, according to Figure
11, training the encoder using the LSTM+ATT does not
improve the F1 score. The findings are reversed when using
the MLP+ATT, in this case, training the encoder decreases
the number of epochs while improving the F1 score in larger
subsets.

8. Discussion
Our results have shown the benefits of using pre-trained
models to learn representations of light curves. We successfully adapted and applied an NLP self-supervised technique
(Devlin et al. 2018) to the domain of light curves. It offers
a solution for learning representations when labels are in
limited quantity. Furthermore, it is an alternative to fully
unsupervised models that focus more on clustering than
making predictions from the data.
Our representation can be extended to light curves coming from different surveys. Using ASTROMER on new data
requires a short training process called fine-tuning to adjust
the representation and minimize the RMSE. A lower RMSE
implies a better representation and, subsequently, a better
result in downstream tasks.
The size of the fine-tuning dataset depends on the similarity between the pre-training and fine-tuning magnitudes
and cadence distributions. For illustration, figure 11c shows
no difference in the F1 scores when all the light curves in the
dataset were used to fine-tune the encoder. Indeed is more
important to bring the classifier more labels than more light
curves in the fine-tuning. As shown in Table 5, minor improvements in RMSE were obtained when fine-tuning ASTROMER on MACHO and OGLE-III, both more similar
to the pre-training dataset than ATLAS. In this scenario,
the fine-tuning stage can even be omitted without affecting
the results.
Regarding the downstream task, we demonstrated the
power of using embeddings to train classifiers, instead of
directly using light curves to predict classes. We evaluated
the classification performances in three commonly used scenarios using limited labeled data. As seen in Figure 11, we
outperform a recurrent neural network classifier trained on
light curves (Baseline) in all the experiments. The improvements in the F1 score became more significant when less
than 500 labels per class were provided.
Article number, page 9 of 15

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main
Baseline max

(b)

(c)

0.8

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

20

50

100

500

20

50

100

500

20

50

100

500

MACHO

MLP+ATT

OGLE-III

(a)

0.8

F1 Score

LSTM+ATT

ATLAS

Baseline

0.3

Number of samples per class used for training

Fig. 11. Testing F1 scores for an LSTM trained on light curves directly (Baseline) and models trained on ASTROMER embeddings
(LSTM+ATT and MLP+ATT). The gray shading represents the standard deviation of the three cross-validation split. Each row
corresponds to the experiments on each survey, MACHO, OGLE and ATLAS, respectively. In (a), we fine-tune ASTROMER and
optimize classifiers on smaller subsets of 20, 50, 100, and 500 samples per class. The weights of ASTROMER are kept frozen when
classifying. However, in (b), we allow gradients to flow into ASTROMER. The third case (c) shows the results of fine-tuning with
the entire set of light curves and classifying on smaller subsets, training ASTROMER simultaneously.

ASTROMER can learn discriminative features from
the pre-training and fine-tuning steps using only a selfsupervised task. As shown in Figure 11, the LSTM+ATT
can predict classes with high F1 scores without the need
to train the encoder along the classifier. Furthermore, its
performance remains the same if the encoder is trained in
tandem, independent of the number of samples per class.
While the LSTM+ATT uses its hidden state to capture
long and short-term dependencies on the attention vectors
over time, the MLP+ATT deals with their average losing
global context information. However, when training the enArticle number, page 10 of 15

coder along with MLP+ATT using more than 100 samples
per class, the encoder is able to counteract this effect, as
shown in Figure 11.
In both models, the discriminative features learned by
the ASTROMER encoder allow the classifiers to converge
faster6 .
6
Note that shorter training times using shared pre-trained representations imply the use of less powerful hardware and fewer
resources, decreasing the time and energy consumption when
training deep learning models (Dhar 2020)

C. Donoso-Oliva et al.: ASTROMER
Baseline

MLP+ATT

(a)

LSTM+ATT

(b)

MACHO

2 × 100
100

2 × 100
OGLE-III

Categorical Cross-Entropy

6 × 10−1

100
6 × 10−1

ATLAS

2 × 100
100
6 × 10−1
0

50

100

0

50

100

Number of Epochs

Fig. 12. Best model validation learning curves for classifiers
trained on 500 samples per class on each catalog. The columns
show the science cases, i.e., freezing (a) and training (b) ASTROMER when classifying.

From the best performing scenarios, the LSTM+ATT
converges faster than the Baseline when freezing the encoder weights, as it only needs to recognize discriminative patterns in the embeddings. On the other hand, the
MLP+ATT only needs to mitigate the effect of averaging
the attention vectors. This task is simpler than learning a
representation from scratch, which is the case of the Baseline classifier. Specifically, the Baseline has to learn how to
extract an informative representation and learn discriminative patterns simultaneously. In the training process, any
change in the representation will impact the subsequent
layers, increasing the number of epochs to converge. This
behavior is related to the Internal Covariance Shift (Ioffe &
Szegedy 2015).
Finally, even though this work’s main contribution
is to help train downstream models on small datasets,
we achieved competitive results against Donoso-Oliva
et al. (2021) using OGLE-III unfolded light curves (88.1%
vs. 88.0% ours). For the MACHO catalog, we compare
ASTROMER-based classifiers against the best (78.1% accuracy) single-band non-period informed model from Jamal & Bloom (2020). We achieved similar results, 78.2%
and 76.7% classification accuracy for the LSTM+ATT and
MLP+ATT, respectively.It is important to mention that
all models from the literature use random smaller partitions while we use a balanced testing set of 100 objects per
class, which is more representative.

9. Python Package
We provide a Python package of ASTROMER, which includes the pre-trained weights obtained in section 6.1. More
pre-trained models will be uploaded in the future, either
from the ASTROMER team or the community.
The stable version 0.x.y matches the code of this paper.
Variables x and y refer to the minor changes and patches
of the current version 0. Major changes will not be related
to this work but must be duly evaluated to guarantee at
least the same performance. ASTROMER v0 can be easily
installed from the Python Package Index (PyPI) repository
as follow:
pip install ASTROMER
The principal module ASTROMER.models include the models
associated to the different encoders. So far, we only have the
SingleBandEncoder corresponding to the ASTROMER
model trained on the MACHO unlabeled dataset. To import and use ASTROMER we can type,
from ASTROMER.models import SingleBandEncoder
model = SingleBandEncoder()
where model is an new instance of ASTROMER. To load
pre-trained weights, we must use the from_pretraining()
method from the model object,
model = model.from_pretraining("macho")
The name in parenthesis matches the zip file name in the
public repository7 .
The simplest way to obtain embeddings is via a collection of NumPy arrays, including light curves information in
the form,
data = [ np.array([[5200, 0.3, 0.2],
[5300, 0.5, 0.1],
[5400, 0.2, 0.3]]),
np.array([[4200, 0.3, 0.1],
[4300, 0.6, 0.3]]) ]
where the axes (from left to right) of the NumPy array are
the times, magnitudes and standard deviation of the magnitudes. Then, to get the embeddings we use the encode
method,
att_vectors = model.encode(data)
where att_vectors is a list containing the embeddings for
each sample in data.
ASTROMER can be easily trained using the fit()
method from the SingleBandEncoder instance.
model.fit(training_data,
validation_data,
epochs=10)
Within
the
fit
method,
training_data
and
validation_data are TensorFlow datasets. We provide a function in the ASTROMER.preprocessing module
to format datasets,
7

https://github.com/astromer-science/weights
Article number, page 11 of 15

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

from ASTROMER.preprocessing import load_numpy
training_data = load_numpy(data,
batch_size=2,
msk_frac=.5,
rnd_frac=.2,
same_frac=.2,
max_obs=200)
Notice data is the same collection of NumPy arrays we
used in the previous examples. In the load_numpy():
– batch_size: Number of samples to process in one forward pass of the training
– msk_frac: Fraction of the sequence to be masked
– rnd_frac: Fraction of the mask to be replaced with random values (see Section 4.3)
– rnd_frac: Fraction of the mask to be replaced with actual values (see Section 4.3)
– max_obs: Maximum windows length (see Section 5.3)
For more information we open project repositories 8
where data, tutorials, documentation, and contributions via
issuing pull requests can be found. These contributions can
be in the form of functionalities or pre-trained models.

10. Conclusion
We present ASTROMER, a single-band embedding for light
curve representation. It is based on the BERT NLP model,
which codifies observations into attention vectors via selfsupervised learning, taking advantage of the massive unlabeled volume of data. In this work, we pretrain ASTROMER on millions of R-band light curves from the MACHO survey.
ASTROMER can be fine-tuned on specific domain
datasets to solve downstream tasks, such as classification
or regression. Here, we use labeled catalogs from MACHO, OGLE-III, and ATLAS surveys to evaluate the effect of using embeddings on the classification of variable
stars. By training a MLP and LSTM classifiers on embeddings, we outperform a baseline LSTM network trained on
light curves. We evaluated classification performances of
fine-tuned models using 20, 50, 100, and 500 samples per
class, obtaining better F1 scores in all experiments. Additionally, we showed that the embeddings-based classifiers
achieved competitive scores against state-of-the-art solutions. In terms of training times, models trained on ASTROMER representations took less epochs than the baseline LSTM classifier to reach the lowest validation loss.
Our self-supervised approach only considers the reconstruction of magnitudes, not including other tasks, such as
the next sentence prediction applied in BERT. As a result, the final representation may not satisfy other downstream tasks correctly. For instance, the consequences of
losing global context information were evidenced on the
difference between the MLP and LSTM classifier, both using attention vectors. In order to make embeddings more
informative, we will explore adding new tasks during the
pre-training and fine-tuning steps in future work.
Finally, we provided a python library including MACHO pre-training weights and fine-tuned models used in
this work. Moreover, our library allows users to pre-train,
8

https://github.com/astromer-science

Article number, page 12 of 15

fine-tune, and get embeddings on new single-band datasets.
We aim to create a collaborative research environment
where pre-trained ASTROMER weights can be shared, saving computational resources and improving state-of-the-art
models.
Acknowledgements. This research was supported by the ANID Millennium Science Initiative ICN12 009, awarded to the Millennium Institute of Astrophysics; FONDECYT Initiation Nº 11191130
(G.C.V.); the Patagón supercomputer of Universidad Austral de Chile
(FONDEQUIP EQM180042) and CONICYT-PFCHA/Doctorado
Nacional/2018-21181990.

References
Abadi, M., Agarwal, A., Barham, P., et al. 2015, TensorFlow: LargeScale Machine Learning on Heterogeneous Systems, software available from tensorflow.org
Alcock, C., Allsman, R., Alves, D., et al. 2003, VizieR Online Data
Catalog, II/247
Alcock, C., Allsman, R., Alves, D. R., et al. 2000, The Astrophysical
Journal, 542, 281
Alcock, C., Allsman, R., Alves, D. R., et al. 1999, Publications of the
Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 111, 1539
Allam Jr, T. & McEwen, J. D. 2021, arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.06178
Ba, J. L., Kiros, J. R., & Hinton, G. E. 2016, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.06450
Becker, I., Pichara, K., Catelan, M., et al. 2020, Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society, 493, 2981
Bishop, C. M. 1995, Neural computation, 7, 108
Catelan, M. 2004, in International Astronomical Union Colloquium,
Vol. 193, Cambridge University Press, 113–123
Catelan, M. & Smith, H. A. 2015, Pulsating stars (John Wiley &
Sons)
Charnock, T. & Moss, A. 2017, The Astrophysical Journal Letters,
837, L28
de Vries, W., van Cranenburgh, A., Bisazza, A., et al. 2019, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1912.09582
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. 2018, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.04805
Dhar, P. 2020, Nature Machine Intelligence, 2, 423
Donoso-Oliva, C., Cabrera-Vives, G., Protopapas, P., Carrasco-Davis,
R., & Estevez, P. 2021, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society
Glorot, X. & Bengio, Y. 2010, in Proceedings of the thirteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, JMLR
Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 249–256
Heinze, A., Tonry, J. L., Denneau, L., et al. 2018, The Astronomical
Journal, 156, 241
Ioffe, S. & Szegedy, C. 2015, in International conference on machine
learning, PMLR, 448–456
Ivezić, Ž., Kahn, S. M., Tyson, J. A., et al. 2019, ApJ, 873, 111
Jamal, S. & Bloom, J. S. 2020, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement
Series, 250, 30
Kingma, D. P. & Ba, J. 2014, arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980
Kremer, J., Stensbo-Smidt, K., Gieseke, F., Pedersen, K. S., & Igel,
C. 2017, IEEE Intelligent Systems, 32, 16
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., & Hinton, G. 2015, nature, 521, 436
Liu, X., Zhang, F., Hou, Z., et al. 2021, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 1
Liu, Y., Ott, M., Goyal, N., et al. 2019, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.11692
Masala, M., Ruseti, S., & Dascalu, M. 2020, in Proceedings of the 28th
International Conference on Computational Linguistics, 6626–6637
Moradshahi, M., Palangi, H., Lam, M. S., Smolensky, P., & Gao, J.
2019, arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.12647
Naul, B., Bloom, J. S., Pérez, F., & van der Walt, S. 2018, Nature
Astronomy, 2, 151
Pan, J., Ting, Y.-S., & Yu, J. 2022, arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.02787
Patel, S. 2020, PhD thesis, The Cooper Union for the Advancement
of Science and Art
Pimentel, Ó., Estévez, P. A., & Förster, F. 2022, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2201.08482
Polignano, M., Basile, P., De Gemmis, M., Semeraro, G., & Basile,
V. 2019, in 6th Italian Conference on Computational Linguistics,
CLiC-it 2019, Vol. 2481, CEUR, 1–6

C. Donoso-Oliva et al.: ASTROMER
Sánchez-Sáez, P., Reyes, I., Valenzuela, C., et al. 2021, The Astronomical Journal, 161, 141
Semeniuta, S., Severyn, A., & Barth, E. 2016, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1603.05118
Szymański, M., Udalski, A., Soszyński, I., et al. 2011, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1107.4008
Tensorflow. 2022, Positional encoding Transformer model for language
understanding
Tonry, J., Denneau, L., Heinze, A., et al. 2018, Publications of the
Astronomical Society of the Pacific, 130, 064505
Tsang, B. T.-H. & Schultz, W. C. 2019, The Astrophysical Journal
Letters, 877, L14
Udalski, A. 2004, arXiv preprint astro-ph/0401123
Udalski, A., Szymański, M., & Szymański, G. 2015, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1504.05966
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., et al. 2017, in Advances in
neural information processing systems, 5998–6008
Vunikili, R., Supriya, H., Marica, V. G., & Farri, O. 2020, in IberLEF@
SEPLN, 505–511

Article number, page 13 of 15

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

Appendix C: Finetuning validation light curves

According to the classical approach (Vaswani et al. 2017,
Devlin et al. 2018), magnitudes and times should be added
to build the input of self-attention blocks. However, summing magnitudes to the PE information is not straightforward as we can interfere with the encoded variability of
times. In principle, most of the values in the last dimensions
of the PE are constant so that we can sum magnitudes on
the unused part (see Figure 2). Instead of imposing the
above assumption, we let the model learn the way to sum
magnitudes from the data. We use a single feed-forward
network, transforming magnitude scalars to 256-dim vectors that match the PE dimensionality. After training, we
confirmed that most of the projected dimensions are zero,
except for one close to 200-th dimension (see Figure A).
Note that the resulting transformation is almost a one-hot
encoding. Thus, we showed that the magnitudes do not interfere with the PE information when joining both vectors.

Figure C shows the validation learning curves associated
with ASTROMER fine-tuned on different training sets. The
figure rows are associated with subsets of 20, 50, 100, and
500 samples per class. We also show the learning curves
for the fine-tuning using all light curves in the respective
catalogs in the last row. The different lines within each
subplot show the RMSE of the cross-validation splits.

Weight magnitude

Appendix A: Summing magnitudes to PE

0.0

−0.2
−0.4
−0.6
−0.8

0

50

100
150
Dimension

200

250

Fig. A.1. Feed-forward network weights that project magnitude
scalars to 256-dimensional vectors. The new magnitude vector
is then summed to the PE information of equal size.

Appendix B: Looking for a window size
Our pre-processing pipeline consists of windows that move
along the light curve, sampling a subset of observations. Using this technique, we deal with the variable length problem
while generating more samples for training. Figure B shows
the distribution of the lengths of the light curves. Considering that most samples are longer than 200 observations,
we defined 200 as the window size.

Counts

105

104

103
200

400

600

800
1000
Length

1200

1400

1600

Fig. B.1. Distributions of light curves lengths from the MACHO pre-training dataset.

Article number, page 14 of 15

Appendix D: Looking for LSTM optimum learning
rate
In order to evaluate the effectiveness of ASTROMER embeddings, we selected a state-of-the-art light curve classifier
from the literature (Donoso-Oliva et al. 2021). The classifier
consists of two layers of long short-term memory (LSTM)
with 256 units each. The idea is to compare how the model
performs when changing the input from light curves to light
curve embeddings. We kept hyper-parameters as they were
defined in the previous work. However, since we changed
the batch size and normalization technique, we looked for
the best learning rate on MACHO light curves. Figure D
summarizes the cross-validated results showing that a rate
of 0.001 performs better in terms of minimal validation loss.

C. Donoso-Oliva et al.: ASTROMER
fold 2

2 × 10−1

10−1

20 samples per class

ATLAS
3 × 10−1

9 × 10−2
8 × 10−2

2 × 10−1

10−1
20

40

60

80

0

20

40

60

0

1.3 × 10−1
1.2 × 10−1

Root-mean-square error

1.1 × 10−1

0

20

40

60

1.3 × 10−1
1.25 × 10−1
1.2 × 10−1
1.15 × 10−1
1.1 × 10−1
1.05 × 10−1
10−1
9.5 × 10−2

1.5 × 10−1
1.4 × 10−1
1.3 × 10−1
1.2 × 10−1
1.1 × 10−1
10−1

9 × 10−2

0

20

40

10−1
9 × 10−2

60

1.2 × 10−1

10−1

1.1 × 10−1

9 × 10−2

1.05 × 10−1
10−1

0

20

40

60

1.18 × 10−1
1.17 × 10−1
1.16 × 10−1
1.15 × 10−1
1.14 × 10−1
1.13 × 10−1
1.12 × 10−1
1.11 × 10−1

8 × 10−2

0

20

40

60

0

20

40

60

80

0

50

100

150

200

75

100

0

20

40

60

80

0

50

100

150

200

0

100

200

300

400

6 × 10−2

3.2 × 10−2
80

50

7 × 10−2

3.4 × 10−2

60

25

2 × 10−1
1.9 × 10−1
1.8 × 10−1
1.7 × 10−1
1.6 × 10−1
1.5 × 10−1
1.4 × 10−1
1.3 × 10−1

3.6 × 10−2

40

0
2.6 × 10−1
2.5 × 10−1
2.4 × 10−1
2.3 × 10−1
2.2 × 10−1
2.1 × 10−1
2 × 10−1
1.9 × 10−1
1.8 × 10−1

3.8 × 10−2

20

80

1.6 × 10−1

4 × 10−2

0

60

1.8 × 10−1

1.25 × 10−1
1.15 × 10−1

40

2.8 × 10−1
2.6 × 10−1
2.4 × 10−1
2.2 × 10−1
2 × 10−1

2 × 10−1

1.7 × 10−1
1.6 × 10−1
1.5 × 10−1
1.4 × 10−1

20

50 samples per class

0

All samples

7 × 10−2

100 samples per class

fold 1
OGLE-III

500 samples per class

fold 0
MACHO

5 × 10−2
0

100

200

300

400

Number of Epochs

Categorical Cross-entropy

Fig. C.1. Validation learning curves from all datasets during fine-tuning.

1e-4
1e-5
1e-1
1e-3

3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0

50

100
Epochs

150

200

Fig. D.1. Validation learning curves from the Baseline classifier
(LSTM) using different learning rates.

Article number, page 15 of 15

