MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2024)

Preprint 17 June 2024

Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style file v3.0

AstroCLIP: A Cross-Modal Foundation Model for Galaxies
Liam Parker,1 ★ † Francois Lanusse,1,3 Siavash Golkar,1 Leopoldo Sarra,1 Miles Cranmer,4
Alberto Bietti,1 Michael Eickenberg,1 Geraud Krawezik,1 Michael McCabe,1,5 Rudy Morel,1 Ruben Ohana,1
Mariel Pettee,1,6 Bruno Régaldo-Saint Blancard,1 Kyunghyun Cho,7,8,9 Shirley Ho1,7,10 and
The Polymathic AI Collaboration
1 The Flatiron Institute, 162 5th Ave, New York, NY, 10010, USA

arXiv:2310.03024v2 [astro-ph.IM] 14 Jun 2024

2 Université Paris-Saclay, Université Paris Cité, CEA, CNRS, AIM, Paris, 91190, France
3 Department of Astronomy, University of Cambridge, Madingley Rd, Cambridge, CB3 0HA, UK
4 Department of Computer Science, University of Colorado, Boulder, 430 UCB, 1111 Engineering Dr, Boulder, CO, 80309, USA
5 Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, 1 Cyclotron Rd, CA, 94720, USA
6 Center for Data Science, New York University, 60 5th Ave, New York, NY, 10011, USA
7 Prescient Design, Genentech, 149 5th Ave, New York, NY, 10010, USA
8 CIFAR Learning in Machines and Brains Fellow, Toronto, ON M5G 1M1, Canada
9 Department of Astrophysics, Princeton University, 4 Ivy Lane, Princeton, NJ, 08544, USA

Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ

ABSTRACT

We present AstroCLIP, a single, versatile model that can embed both galaxy images and spectra into a shared, physically
meaningful latent space. These embeddings can then be used - without any model fine-tuning - for a variety of downstream
tasks including (1) accurate in-modality and cross-modality semantic similarity search, (2) photometric redshift estimation, (3)
galaxy property estimation from both images and spectra, and (4) morphology classification. Our approach to implementing
AstroCLIP consists of two parts. First, we embed galaxy images and spectra separately by pretraining separate transformer-based
image and spectrum encoders in self-supervised settings. We then align the encoders using a contrastive loss. We apply our
method to spectra from the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument and images from its corresponding Legacy Imaging Survey.
Overall, we find remarkable performance on all downstream tasks, even relative to supervised baselines. For example, for a task
like photometric redshift prediction, we find similar performance to a specifically-trained ResNet18, and for additional tasks
like physical property estimation (stellar mass, age, metallicity, and sSFR), we beat this supervised baseline by 19% in terms
of 𝑅 2 . We also compare our results to a state-of-the-art self-supervised single-modal model for galaxy images, and find that
our approach outperforms this benchmark by roughly a factor of two on photometric redshift estimation and physical property
prediction in terms of 𝑅 2 , while remaining roughly in-line in terms of morphology classification. Ultimately, our approach
represents the first cross-modal self-supervised model for galaxies, and the first self-supervised transformer-based architectures
for galaxy images and spectra.
Key words: methods: data analysis – galaxies: general

1

Introduction

Astronomical datasets continue to expand rapidly in size and complexity. Ongoing surveys like the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI; Dey et al. 2019) already encompass millions of objects
and future surveys, like the Vera C. Rubin Legacy Surveys of Space
and Time (LSST; Ivezić et. al. 2019) and Euclid (Laureĳs et al. 2011),
are expected to broaden this scope to include billions of objects.
A variety of computational approaches have been developed to
process the data from these surveys (Ivezić et al. 2020). In recent
years, a growing subset of these approaches have employed data-

★ E-mail:lparker@flatironinstitute.org

† Present Address: 162 5th Ave, New York, NY 10010, USA
© 2024 The Authors

driven methodologies from machine learning (ML). To date, these
approaches have largely been separated into two different classes:
• Supervised methods leverage labeled subsets of observational
data to perform discriminative tasks like galaxy morphology classification, photometric redshift estimation, weak lensing, etc. (for
a recent review, see Huertas-Company & Lanusse 2023), and have
achieved significant progress in data-rich settings. However, these
methods are ultimately constrained by the quantity and quality of
labelled training samples available and are often exposed to only a
small fraction of the potentially available data during training. Additionally, bespoke supervised models need to be retrained/redesigned
from scratch for each new task, creating significant computational
inefficiencies in the data analysis pipeline.
• Unsupervised methods use clustering, principal component
analysis, and other techniques to bypass the need for labelled data.

2

Liam Parker

These have been employed for tasks like strong lens detection (Cheng
et al. 2020), anomaly detection (Margalef-Bentabol et al. 2020), etc.
However, while they do not rely on labelled subsets of the data, they
are still typically task-specific, and they have lagged behind their
supervised counterparts in performance (Caron et al. 2018).
Recently, a new line of inquiry has explored self-supervised learning (SSL) as an alternative. These approaches learn high-quality
embeddings i.e. low-dimensional representations of the objects that
preserve their important physical information - in the absence of
labeled training data. These embeddings can then be used for a variety of downstream tasks, eliminating the need to retrain bespoke
supervised models from scratch for each new dataset or new task.
This is achieved by training models to perform some surrogate
task, such as identifying corrupted pairs or filling in masked subsections of the input data. This in turn produces a high-quality, lowdimensional representation which can be used as a “foundation” for
downstream tasks; these types of models are therefore often dubbed
foundation models (Bommasani et al. 2021). In computer vision (CV;
He et al. 2021; Tong et al. 2022) and natural language processing
(NLP; Radford et al. 2019), these approaches have already closed the
gap with their supervised counterparts; indeed, zero- and few-shot1
training on the learned representations can even exceed supervised
performance, especially in domains in which training large supervised models from scratch is infeasible due to constraints on labelled
data (Bommasani et al. 2021). Moreover, recent works have now extended these results into the physical sciences more broadly (Nguyen
et al. 2023; McCabe et al. 2023; Subramanian et al. 2024).
A variety of SSL strategies have already been deployed in observational astronomy. For example, one of the earliest explorations
of SSL in the context of astronomical images is the application of
the Momentum Constrative pretraining strategy (MoCo v2; He et al.
2020) on galaxy images (Hayat et al. 2020; Stein et al. 2021b). This
framework learns embeddings of images by maximizing the similarity of embeddings between different augmented views of the same
image while minimizing similarity with embeddings of other images.
These embeddings can then be used to predict galaxy redshift (Hayat
et al. 2021), perform similarity searches, and search for rare, scientifically interesting objects like strong gravitational lenses (Stein et al.
2021a). Another prominent example in this field is the application of
a Bootstrap Your Own Latent (BYOL; Grill et al. 2020) strategy for
galaxy morphology classification (Walmsley et al. 2022a) to achieve
state-of-the-art performance after fine-tuning in the low data regime.
SSL has also been employed on galaxy spectra. For example, Portillo et al. (2020) use a variational auto-encoder (VAE) to reduce
the dimensionality of galaxy spectra to a small latent space before
using a decoder to generate the rest-frame spectrum; the learned latent space then possesses significant intrinsic, rest-frame information
about the galaxy spectra, which can be used for downstream tasks
like outlier detection, interpolation, and galaxy class classification.
Further work Teimoorinia et al. (2022); Melchior et al. (2023) add
successive improvements to the existing VAE; their embeddings are
then similarly useful for downstream tasks like anomaly detection
(Liang et al. 2023a,b).
However, despite this recent progress, all of the current SSL approaches in observational astronomy have been limited to embedding

1

In zero-shot learning, the model applies its learned representations to identify or categorize new, unseen data instances, without the need for additional
training specifically on these new categories or instances. In few-shot learning, the pretrained model is fine-tuned with a very small dataset related to the
new task.
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2024)

objects from a single modality at a time. In an astrophysical context
though, there exist a number of complementary observations of the
same underlying physical processes; for example, galaxies are often measured using a variety of realizations, including photometry,
multi-band images, and optical spectra. As such, a universal foundation model for observational astronomy should be able to simultaneously embed cross-modal realizations of the same physical process
into a shared latent space. Then, the learned representations of any
given object can be easily searched across different modalities and
used seamlessly for a variety of downstream tasks.
In this work, we introduce AstroCLIP, a cross-modal foundation
model for galaxies. Our approach consists of two distinct steps. First,
we pre-train state-of-the-art image and spectrum encoders to extract high-quality embeddings of galaxies in a single-modal, selfsupervised setting. Then, we align the image and spectrum embeddings by maximizing the similarity between cross-modal embeddings
that correspond to the same galaxy while simultaneously minimizing
the similarity between cross-modal embeddings that correspond to
different galaxies.
We apply our methodology to optical spectra from the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI)2 and multi-band images from
its corresponding Legacy Imaging Survey3 , and demonstrate that
our learned embeddings are organized around meaningful physical
semantics. This allows them to be used as powerful foundations for
both similarity searches and discriminative tasks. This approach is
illustrated in Figure 1. Ultimately, we hope that in providing a powerful cross-modal foundation model for galaxy spectra and images,
along with a set of physically organized, low-dimensional galaxy
embeddings, we will empower a wide variety of downstream data
analysis applications in the field.
The main contributions of our work are:
• We develop the first self-supervised transformer-based models
for galaxy spectra and images.
• We apply a cross-modal training regime to align the pre-trained
image and spectrum encoders around shared physical semantics,
creating a unified latent space for spectra and images.
• We empirically demonstrate that our cross-modal embeddings
capture core physical properties of the underlying galaxies. This
enables, with only minimal downstream processing, AstroCLIP to
be used for:
– In-modal and cross-modal galaxy similarity searches.
– Photometric redshift estimation
– Galaxy property estimation from images
– Galaxy property estimation from spectra
– Galaxy morphology classification from images.
Code for our models, training and testing kit is available online here.
Our paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we provide background on self-supervised learning, as well as on the particular SSL
objectives used in the present paper. In section 3, we describe the
specifics of our AstroCLIP implementation. In section 4, we provide
the data sets that we use to train our models and in section 5, we outline the training process of our models. In section 6, we present our
results on in-modal and cross-modal similarity searches, photometric redshift estimation, galaxy property prediction, and morphology
classification. Finally, we discuss our results and further extensions
of our paper in section 7.

2
3

https://data.desi.lbl.gov/doc/
https://www.legacysurvey.org/

AstroCLIP

3

Candidate
spectra

Spectra
encoder

Nearest
neighbor
Image
encoder
Shared embedding
space

Zero-shot prediction

Figure 1. Illustration of the AstroCLIP cross-modal training strategy. This approach consists of two steps. First, galaxy images and spectra are embedded
separately by pretraining both an image and a spectrum encoder in a SSL setting. Then, these encoders are aligned using a cross-modal contrastive loss. Once
aligned, these embeddings allow us to connect and compare cross-modal representations. Moreover, they possess physically meaningful high-level information
which can be used for a variety of downstream tasks on which the model was neither trained nor fine-tuned.

2

Self-Supervised Learning

In self-supervised learning (SSL), the objective is to train a model
to learn to extract rich, low-dimensional representations from data
without the need for any labels. This is typically achieved by training
the model to perform some contrived surrogate task on the input data.
In recent years, a variety of such surrogate tasks have been developed.
One common example of such a task in NLP is to predict the next
word in a sentence given the previous words; this is typically called
autoregressive prediction (Radford et al. 2019). Many other such
objectives have been developed, including masked reconstruction
(Devlin et al. 2018; He et al. 2021), self-distillation (Fang et al.
2021), and contrastive learning (Chen et al. 2020; Radford et al.
2021). Ultimately, these approaches have been shown to generate
generalizeable, highly informative representations in both NLP (e.g.,
GPT: Radford et al. 2019) and CV (He et al. 2021; Tong et al. 2022).
Despite their task-agnostic training, the zero- and few-shot learning
performed on the low-dimensional representations captured by these
models has outperformed supervised training in a wide variety of
settings, especially in domains in which training large supervised
models from scratch is infeasible due to constraints on labelled data
(Bommasani et al. 2021). These successes have also highlighted
the importance of scale in SSL training strategies, as scaling laws
established in both CV (Zhai et al. 2022) and NLP (Fang et al. 2021)
demonstrate significant gains in performance with larger model sizes,
dataset sizes, and total compute.
In the following sections, we outline the relevant SSL training
methodologies used in the present paper. In particular, we focus on
the contrastive cross-modal strategy that we adopt for AstroCLIP
in subsection 2.1. We then provide a general overview of the selfsupervised masked modelling strategy that we adopt for spectrum
embedding in subsection 2.2 and the self-supervised self-distillation

with no labels strategy that we adopt for image embedding in subsection 2.3; we provide a more detailed description of both these
approaches in subsection A1 and subsection A2 respectively. For
a comprehensive review of self-supervised methods, we direct the
reader to (Balestriero et al. 2023).

2.1

Cross-Modal Contrastive Techniques

A variety of techniques have emerged for connecting representations
across modalities4 . One such method, Contrastive Language–Image
Pretraining (CLIP; Radford et al. 2021), has achieved widespread
success by training neural networks to align language-based descriptions of objects with their corresponding images. CLIP works by using an image embedder and a text embedder to embed both language
and image representations into a shared embedding space. These embedders are trained jointly under a contrastive loss, whereby positive
pairs (i.e. image-language pairs corresponding to the same object)
are brought closer together while negative pairs (i.e. image-language
pairs corresponding to different objects) are pushed apart.
Formally, let X ∈ R 𝑁 and Y ∈ R 𝑀 be two sets of observations of
the same objects from two different modalities; in CLIP, these would
be images and textual descriptions corresponding to the same objects.
Then, the goal is to construct a pair of encoders, 𝑓 𝜙 : R 𝑁 → R𝑑 and
𝑔 𝜃 : R 𝑀 → R𝑑 , that compress these two modalities into a shared
𝑑-dimensional space. In particular, we want this embedding space
to maximize the mutual information between these representations,
𝐼 ( 𝑓 𝜙 (x), 𝑔 𝜃 (y)).

4

In this context, “modality” refers to the type of data input, such as images, textual descriptions, segmentation maps, etc., each requiring different
processing techniques.
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2024)

4

Liam Parker

Practically, direct computation of the mutual information is a notoriously difficult estimation problem for finite data (McAllester &
Stratos 2020; Song & Ermon 2019). Therefore, contrastive methods like CLIP typically rely on maximizing approximations of the
mutual information. In this case, CLIP uses an Information NoiseContrastive Estimation (InfoNCE; van den Oord et al. 2018; Gutmann
& Hyvärinen 2010), a variational bound on the mutual information.
Although InfoNCE is biased, it represents a stable, low variance
bound on the mutual information that has proven successful in a
wide variety of contrastive methods (Radford et al. 2021). The InfoNCE loss is given as
𝐾

L 𝐼𝑛 𝑓 𝑜𝑁 𝐶𝐸 (X, Y) = −

1 ∑︁
exp(𝑆𝐶 (x𝑖 , y𝑖 )/𝜏)
log Í𝐾
.
𝐾
exp(𝑆𝐶 (x𝑖 , y 𝑗 )/𝜏)
𝑖=1

(1)

𝑗

Here, 𝜏 > 0 represents a smoothing parameter (sometimes referred
to as temperature) and 𝑗 represent the indices of negative examples
not associated with the object 𝑖.
Additionally, a choice of similarity metric, 𝑆𝐶 , must be specified
to determine the similarity between representations in the embedding space. In CLIP, the cosine similarity between two points in the
embedding space is used, such that
𝑆𝐶 (x𝑖 , y 𝑗 ) =

(x𝑖 ) 𝑇 y 𝑗
∥x𝑖 ∥ 22 ∥y 𝑗 ∥ 22

.

(2)

Intuitively, the InfoNCE objective works by bringing together points
in the embedding space that correspond to the same underlying physical object and pushing points in the embedding space away from each
other if they correspond to different underlying physical objects. Because the InfoNCE loss is itself upper-bounded by the number of
negative samples, log(𝐾 −1), CLIP-style models are typically trained
with large batch sizes of negative pairs, ranging from 𝐾 = 512 to
𝐾 = 4096, where larger batch sizes typically correlate with better
performance (Radford et al. 2021).
While CLIP has proven successful on a variety of cross-modal
problems, the method has shown to suffer from some inefficiencies in
training models from scratch, namely due to high computational costs
associated with the necessary large batch size and training instability
issues when scaling up. Recently however, Sun et al. (2023) have
shown that these issues can be partially overcome using a variety
of techniques, including using pre-trained, single modal models as
initializers in the CLIP training.

2.2

Masked Modelling

Masked modelling is an SSL technique used to extract powerful
representations in both NLP (Masked Language Modelling, MLM;
Devlin et al. 2018) and CV (Masked Image Modelling, MIM; Zhou
et al. 2021) settings. Given an input with random masked patches5 ,
the objective in masked modeling is to learn to fill in these randomly
masked patches using the remaining unmasked parts of the input.
This forces the model to learn to infer the masked patches from the
unmasked patches, thereby encouraging robust feature representations of the input that capture the structure and content of the input.
Then, when an unmasked input is fed to the model, the learned projection of that input should represent a powerful, low-dimensional
embedding. For a more formal discussion, see subsection A1.
5

In MLM, the patches of the input are typically contiguous segments of text,
while in MIM, the patches of the input are typically square patches of the
image.
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2024)

2.3

Self-Distillation with No Labels

Self-distillation with No Labels (DINO; Caron et al. 2021) is another
SSL technique widely used in CV and NLP. DINO was inspired
by knowledge distillation (Buciluǎ et al. 2006), a method which
forces small student networks to approximate the outputs of large,
pre-trained teacher networks in order to reduce model size. Like
knowledge distillation, DINO still relies on a student network matching the outputs of a teacher network. However, rather than using a
pre-trained teacher network, DINO instead uses a copy of the student network composed of an iterated average of past iterations of
the student network’s weights. By composing the teacher network
this way, the teacher network effectively undergoes an ensembling
technique, enabling it to guide the student network during training
by providing better representation outputs. Since its inception, this
technique has been integrated with masked image modeling in Zhou
et al. (2021), and further improved with (Oquab et al. 2023), which
has demonstrated superior performance on a variety of downstream
tasks including semantic segmentation, image classification, video
processing, etc. For a more detailed treatment of DINO, iBOT, and
DINOv2, see subsection A2.

3

AstroCLIP Model Implementation

The core of our approach lies in the idea that cross-modal observations of a given source can be thought of as filtered, noisy views
of the same underlying physical process. Therefore, they should intrinsically possess a shared latent space in which the embeddings of
these cross-modal representations can be aligned. To that end, we
present a two-step process to train cross-modal galaxy encoders:
(i) We pre-train two single-modal galaxy encoders separately using SSL techniques. For galaxy images, we pretrain a vision transformer (ViT; Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) using a carefully modified version of the DINOv2 self-supervised regime (see subsubsection A2.4).
For galaxy spectra, we pretrain a 1D transformer encoder using a
standard mask-filling strategy (see subsection 2.2).
(ii) We then train (or “fine-tune”) our pre-trained models in a
contrastive setting (see subsection 2.1) to align the cross-modal embeddings of the same galaxies in a shared embedding space using the
CLIP cross-modal alignment strategy (see subsection 2.1).
Notably, we opt to pre-train single-modal models separately before
CLIP alignment instead of training the entire AstroCLIP model from
scratch. For one, the size of the image dataset far exceeds the size of
the union between image and spectrum datasets, allowing us to pretrain our image embedder on roughly two orders of magnitude more
data. Additionally, previous studies (Sun et al. 2023) demonstrate
that the training instabilities and high computational cost associated
with CLIP-style training can be partially mitigated by CLIP-aligning
pre-trained models.
We provide the details of the galaxy image and spectrum embedders below. Notably, both models implement transformer-based
architectures; we provide extensive background on these in subsection A3, and direct the reader to Vaswani et al. (2017) and Dosovitskiy
et al. (2020) for additional information. We also provide details on the
AstroCLIP model implementation. All training details are provided
later in section 5.
3.1

Galaxy Image Transformer

Our galaxy image model’s architecture is a standard vision transformer (ViT; Dosovitskiy et al. 2020). To prepare a galaxy image,

AstroCLIP
x ∈ R 𝑁 × 𝑁 for the ViT architecture, we first patch the image into
non-overlapping, contiguous patches of size 𝑃 × 𝑃. These patches
2
are then flattened, to create a sequence x 𝑝 ∈ R𝐾 × ( 𝑃 ·𝐶 ) , where 𝐶
is the number of channels and 𝐾 = 𝑁 2 /𝑃2 is the total number of
patches, which becomes the effective input sequence length for the
transformer.
Next, we project the patches from dimension 𝑃2 · 𝐶 to some latent
2
dimension 𝐷 𝐼 using a trainable, linear projection E ∈ R ( 𝑃 ·𝐶 ) ×𝐷𝐼 .
Additionally, we add position embeddings to each of the patch embeddings; these are standard, learnable 1D vectors E 𝑝𝑜𝑠 ∈ R𝐾 ×𝐷𝐼
that allow the model to retain positional information for each image
patch. Finally, we prepend a class token xclass to the sequence. This
class token is a learnable embedding that allows the network to aggregate global information in the image, and whose final representation
in the network serves as the global image representation. Altogether,
this results in a “processed” input of
x∗ = [xclass , x1 E, x2 E, ..., x 𝑁 E] + E 𝑝𝑜𝑠 .
𝑝

𝑝

𝑝

(3)

Once this set of embeddings is generated, we pass them to the transformer model. The transformer consists of a series of Transformer
blocks (Vaswani et al. 2017), each of which apply multi-head cross
attention followed by a series of multi-layer perceptron (MLP; sometimes called “fully-connected”) layers and finally a layer norm. A
final layer normalization is applied to the output class and patch tokens. Additionally, we attach a projection head to the class token,
which consists of an additional MLP that projects the latent dimensionality of the ViT 𝐷 𝐼 to some desired dimensionality of the output.
We provide the specific implementation details of the galaxy image
ViT in subsubsection B1.1.
3.2

Galaxy Spectrum Transformer

Our galaxy spectrum transformer is loosely modeled after the GPT-2
model, although it performs masked modeling rather than autoregressive prediction6 (Radford et al. 2019). As with the galaxy image
ViT, to prepare a galaxy spectrum y ∈ R𝑇 for the transformer architectures, we first reshape the 𝑇 dimensional native representation
of the spectrum to a sequence of shape (𝑇 mod A) × 𝐵, where each
element of this new sequence is a contiguous 𝐵-element segment
of the original sequence, and adjacent elements have an overlap of
size 𝐴; these new elements now form our patches, y ∈ R𝐾 ×𝐵 . The
patches are once again projected to some latent dimension 𝐷 𝑆 using
a trainable, linear project, and position encodings are added and a
class token prepended, as in Equation 3. Once this set of embeddings
is generated, we pass them to the transformer model. We provide the
specific implementation details of the galaxy spectrum transformer
in subsubsection B2.1
3.3

DESI-LS after Cuts
Cross-Matched DESI & DESI-LS
PROVABGS Properties
Galaxy Zoo DECaLS Classifications

Number of Galaxies
76,446,849
197,632
105,159
222,929

Table 1. The number of galaxies present in each of our datasets. In particular, we pre-train our image model on the DESI-LS and our spectrum
and AstroCLIP model on the cross-matched DESI & DESI-LS. We perform
downstream redshift estimation on this same dataset, property prediction on
the cross-matched PROVABGS dataset, and morphology classification on
Galaxy Zoo DECaLS.

outlined in subsection 3.1 or subsection 3.2. Next, the model processes the patchified input through the appropriate image or spectrum
transformer, resulting in a processed sequence of vectors with dimensionality equal to the embedding dimension of the transformer, either
𝐷 𝐼 or 𝐷 𝑆 .
To transform these vectors into an embedding space that is shared
between the image and spectra inputs, AstroCLIP applies a multihead cross-attention between these final-layer tokens and a learnable
query vector q ∈ R512 . Specifically, the query to this multi-head
attention is q, while the keys and values are the final-layer tokens
of either the image or vision transformer (see Equation A9 for more
details). This allows the model to use the attention scores computed
between q and the transformer-output vectors to selectively attend to
specific vectors from the transformer output, effectively producing
a weighted average of some linear projection of these vectors. The
output of this cross-attention is then a single vector z∗ with the same
embedding dimension as q; it does not matter how many key and
value vectors are received, the dimensionality will remain fixed. z∗
is itself then passed through a series of MLP blocks to produce z.
The final outputs of the AstroCLIP model, z, are embedding vectors of both galaxy images and spectra that reside in a shared, unified
latent space. We provide the specific implementation details of the
galaxy spectrum transformer in subsubsection B3.1. The alignment
of the embedding vector corresponding to a galaxy image, zim , with
the embedding vector corresponding to a galaxy spectrum, z𝑠 𝑝 , is
performed during CLIP training, detailed further in section 5.

4

Data

We use galaxy spectra from the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI) and galaxy images from its corresponding Legacy Imaging Survey (DESI-LS). We use both DESI and DESI-LS for SSL pretraining, along with a variety of additional datasets for downstream
tasks. All of these data are detailed below, and a summary of the
number of galaxies in each dataset is provided in Table 1.

AstroCLIP Model

The final AstroCLIP model is a sort of compositional model consisting of both the image and spectrum transformers outlined above. The
model is constructed using the following steps. First, for any given
observation x with a corresponding label 𝑙 = {‘image’, ‘spectrum’},
the model patchifies the input according to the appropriate strategy
6

Dataset

5

We deviate from GPT-2 in that we initialize all the weights of the transformer blocks with a normal distribution with standard deviation given by
(2 × fan-in × num-layers) −1/2 . The dependence of the standard deviation on
the number of transformer blocks is to counteract the effect of having a series
of residual connections.

4.1
4.1.1

Self-Supervised Training Datasets
DESI-LS Images

We use the DESI-LS Data Release 9 from January 2021 as prepared
by Stein et al. (2021b). The observations in the northern galactic cap
(NGC) were captured by the Beĳing-Arizona Sky Survey for 𝑔 and 𝑟
bands and the Mayall Legacy Survey for 𝑧 bands respectively, while
the observations in the southern galactic cap (SGC) were captured
by the Dark Energy Camera Legacy Survey (DECaLS).
We keep every source in the sweep catalogues of the DESI-LS
that was not identified as a star and whose magnitude in the 𝑧-band
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2024)

6

Liam Parker

is between 20 and 21 is kept. After imposing the mag 𝑧 cut-off,
this results in a total of 76, 446, 849 galaxies. Many of these galaxy
images include overlapping regions of the sky due to the small angular
separation between galaxies in galaxy clusters.
These galaxies are imaged in three optical bands (𝑔, 𝑟, 𝑧) at a pixel
scale of 0.262 arcsec. The images extracted by Stein et al. (2021b)
are taken in 256×256 cut-outs and we crop these images to 144×144
center-cuts as the vast majority of galaxies will cover less area than
the total size of the cut-outs. Additionally, we normalize the images
using a standard Z-scoring regime, whereby we subtract the mean
and divide by the standard deviation of the image dataset, ensuring
that each pixel value has a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1,
thus standardizing the input data for consistent model training and
performance.

4.1.2

DESI Spectra

We use data from the DESI Early Data Release (EDR) (Collaboration
et al. 2023), which consists of spectra observed during the Survey
Validation campaign. This campaign was divided into the Target Selection Validation phase, designed to finalize target selection, and the
One-Percent Survey, a pilot survey of the full program that covered
roughly 140deg2 . Since the dataset includes samples of highly different overall amplitudes, in order to make it easier for the network to
process all samples, we Z-score each individual sample. We include
the mean (𝜇) and standard deviation (𝜎) information by appending
it to the spectrum sequence.

4.1.3

Dark Energy Survey Image-Spectra Pairs

We cross-match the DESI-LS galaxy images and DESI spectra using
the target IDs associated with each galaxy. This yields a paired galaxy
image-spectra sample of 197,632 galaxies. We build this paired sample using the same preprocessing steps for images and spectra detailed
above. We split our sample using a 90/10 train-test split for training
and evaluation.

4.2
4.2.1

Downstream Datasets
Photometric Redshift Estimation

For photometric redshift estimation, we use the catalog-reported redshifts from the DESI spectra associated with each DECaLS image
in the cross-matched image-spectrum dataset. We remove spurious
entries by only selecting entries for which mag𝑔 , mag𝑟 , mag 𝑧 > 0.
We split the catalog using the same split as above.

4.2.2

PROVABGS Catalog

For galaxy property estimation, we use a sample corresponding to
roughly 1% of the DESI Bright Galaxy Survey. Specifically, we
collect estimates of the stellar mass (𝑀∗ ), star formation rate (SFR),
mass-weighted stellar metallicity (𝑍 𝑀𝑊 ), and mass-weighted stellar
age (𝑡 𝑎𝑔𝑒, 𝑀𝑊 ) from the complementary PRObabilistic Value-Added
Bright Galaxy Survey (PROVABGS) Catalog (Hahn et al. 2023b). In
particular, we match our image-spectra pairs with the PROVABGS
reported best-fit of the above galaxy properties using the DESI target
IDs associated with each galaxy. We remove spurious entries in the
PROVABGS catalog by only selecting entries for which 𝑀∗ > 0 and
mag𝑔 , mag𝑟 , mag 𝑧 > 0. This leaves 105,159 samples, which we split
using the same split as above.
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2024)

4.2.3

Galaxy Zoo DECaLS

For galaxy morphology classification, we use Galaxy Zoo DECaLS7 .
In particular, we use the classifications from GZD-5 (Walmsley et al.
2022b), which includes over 7.5 million volunteer response classifications for roughly 314,000 galaxies on a variety of questions,
including morphological T-types, strong bars, arm curvature, etc.
We cross-match the Galaxy Zoo DECaLS galaxies with the DESILS. After cross-matching the galaxy databases, we remove any galaxy
with fewer than 3 volunteer classifications, resulting in a 1.5% reduction in dataset size. This leaves 222,929 galaxies with associated
morphological classifications, which we split using a randomized
80/20 train-test split.
For each galaxy, we use the debiased8 volunteer votes on each
of the ten questions. We only use a galaxy to train on a question if
50% or more of the volunteers shown that galaxy were asked that
question. Moreover, we only evaluate on galaxies on which more
than 34 volunteers gave classifications, as is convention in Walmsley
et al. (2022b). To produce a discrete set of classifications for each
of the questions, we round the highest predicted vote fraction for a
question to 1, and round the remaining fractions to 0.

5

Model Training

As stated above, we train our models using a two-step process; first,
we pretrain both image and spectrum transformers in single-modal,
self-supervised settings on the DESI-LS galaxy images using the
DINO v2 loss and the DESI galaxy spectra using a masked modeling
loss respectively. Then, we train the compositional AstroCLIP model
on the galaxy image-spectra pairs.

5.1

Galaxy Image Pre-Training

We pretrain the galaxy image transformer on the DESI-LS galaxy
images using the DINO v2 self-supervised learning strategy. For
each input image, we first create a set 𝑉 of local and global crops. We
use 8 local crops of resolution 602 covering a random square cut-out
with area equal to 39.4% of the input image, and 2 global crops of
resolution 1442 covering a random square cut-out with area equal
to 94.7% of the input image. The size of the local crops are chosen
such that some part of the target galaxies, which are always centered,
is always present in the local crop. The following augmentations are
also applied to the various crops:
• Rotation/Orientation: We randomly flip both global and local
crops across both axes with 𝑝 = 0.5 probability and randomly rotate
the images by a random angle sampled between U (0, 𝜋).
• Gaussian Blur: We randomly blur each channel of the images
using a Gaussian kernel. The Gaussian blur is selected to model
additional PSF smoothing, and the size of the blurring kernel is
parameterized by lognormal fits to the PSF distribution of the data,
as in Stein et al. (2021b). This is applied with 𝑝 = 1.0 to our first
global crop, 𝑝 = 0.1 to our second global crop, and 𝑝 = 0.5 to each
of our local crops.

7

https://data.galaxyzoo.org/
Debiasing in Galaxy Zoo DECaLS includes both redshift debiasing, which
mitigates the debiasing from the fact that higher redshfit galaxies appear
fainter and smalleer on the sky, and volunteer weighting, which discards the
classifications of volunteers with a reported artificate rate over 0.5 and at least
150 total classifications. For more details, see Walmsley et al. (2022b).
8

AstroCLIP
• Gaussian Noise: We randomly add Gaussian noise to the image
by sampling the noise level from lognormal distributions tuned for
each filter channel, as in Stein et al. (2021b). As with the Gaussian
blur, the noise is applied with 𝑝 = 1.0 to our first global crop, 𝑝 = 0.1
to our second global crop, and 𝑝 = 0.5 to each of our local crops.

6

Notably, we opt for far fewer augmentations than the original DINO
v2 method - omitting solarization, color jittering, and random
grayscale - in order to minimize the total number of physical corruptions applied to our data.
Once cropped and randomly augmented, we patchify all crops
in 𝑉 using Equation 3. This produces, for each global and local
crop, a sequence of patches of length 25 and 144 respectively. For
the student network, we provide all sequences in 𝑉, while for the
teacher network, we provide only the global crops; thus, the student
is fed 25 × 8 + 144 × 2 = 488 patches, while the teacher is fed
144 × 2 = 288 patches for each image. The self-distillation loss,
LKD , is then computed as the cross-entropy loss between the class
token of the student network for its given input and the centered
and sharpened class token of the teacher network for its given input;
the equation for this loss is provided in Equation A2. Additionally,
we apply a random mask to the global crops in 𝑉 with a masking
ratio 𝑟 ∼ U (0.1, 0.5). We then feed the unmasked global crops
to the teacher network and the masked global crops to the student
network, and compute the masked-modelling iBOT loss, LMIM , as
in Equation A5. Finally, we compute the KoLeo loss for each batch
Lkoleo , as in Equation A7.
We train the galaxy image ViT over the entire DECaLS using the
composite DINOv2 loss and the procedure outlined above. The exact
implementation details of our training are provided in subsubsection B1.2.

AstroCLIP : (xim , xsp ) ↦→ (zim , zsp ) ∈ R512 .

5.2

Galaxy Spectrum Pre-Training

We pretrain the galaxy spectrum transformer on the DESI galaxy
spectra using the Masked-Modelling self-supervised learning strategy. For each input spectrum, we patchify the spectrum into contiguous, overlapping patches as outlined in subsection 3.2. We then
randomly replace 6 contiguous segments of length 30 (equivalent
to length 600 in the original spectra representation) with zeros and
train the model to minimize the Mean Square Error loss between
the predictions and the ground truth of the replaced segments of the
sequence using LMM provided in Equation A1. The exact implementation details of our training are provided in subsubsection B2.2.

5.3

AstroCLIP Training

To perform our contrastive training step, we remove the projection
head of both the pre-trained image and spectrum transformers and
attach the multi-head cross attention described in subsection 3.3. We
then align both image and spectrum transformers using the InfoNCE
loss (see Equation 1) computed between galaxy images and spectra,
where positive pairs are defined as image-spectra pairs corresponding
to the same underlying galaxy, and negative pairs are defined as
image-spectra pairs corresponding to different underlying galaxies.
We use a relatively large batch size of 𝐾 = 1024 image-spectrum pairs
to increase the number of negative pairs per batch, as is convention
in CLIP-style experiments in computer science (Radford et al. 2021).
The exact implementation details of our training are provided in
subsubsection B3.2.

7

Results

To demonstrate the capabilities of AstroCLIP, we deploy it across a
variety of tasks for which it was neither explicitly trained nor finetuned. To that end, we embed the galaxy images and spectra in the
various held-out test sets listed above (see section 4) as follows:
(4)

We normalize both image and spectrum embeddings as z̄im = zim /∥
zim ∥ 2 and z̄sp = zsp /∥ zsp ∥ 2 . This produces a set of normalized
galaxy embeddings in a shared, cross-modal latent space which can
easily be queried, searched, and used as summary statistics for the
ensuing downstream tasks.
6.1

Example Retrieval by Similarity Search

We perform example retrieval using semantic similarity search.
Specifically, for some query galaxy, we use its normalized vector
embedding to search over all galaxies in the held-out test database.
This search is performed using the cosine-similarity (normalized
scalar product, see Equation 2) between the embedded query galaxy
z̄𝑞 and all of the other galaxy embeddings in the test database.
Unlike previous SSL methods in astronomy, AstroCLIP’s similarity search is not constrained to a single modality. Instead, because
the embedding space produced by AstroCLIP is shared between both
images and spectra, both the image and spectrum of any query galaxy
can be used to search among all galaxies in the embedded dataset.
For example, if we wish to search for galaxy images matching a
sp
given query spectrum x𝑖 , we simply calculate the cosine similarity
sp
between the query spectrum embedding z̄𝑖 and the image embedim
dings in the held-out test set, z̄ 𝑗 , and return the target images with
the greatest values; no additional transformations or alterations are
needed.
We present some examples using this method for both in-modality
similarity search - where we determine the neighbors according to the cosine similarity between same-modalitiy embeddings
sp
im
(i.e. 𝑆𝐶 (z𝑞 , zsp ) or 𝑆𝐶 (zim
𝑞 , z )) - and cross-modality similarity search - where we determine neighbors according to the cosp
sine similarity between cross-modal embeddings (i.e. 𝑆𝐶 (zim
𝑞 ,z )
sp im
or 𝑆𝐶 (z𝑞 , z )). We present the images of the four “closest” galaxies
for a randomly selected query galaxy for all four possible pairs of
modalities in Figure 2 (a-e). We also present the spectra of the four
“closest” galaxies for a red quiescent galaxy and a blue star forming
galaxy for all four possible pairs of modalities in Figure 2 (f-i). By
construction, the closest match for an in-modal similarity search is
the query itself. Ultimately, this sort of capability is especially important when searching for rare or interesting objects, as exemplified
by Stein et al. (2021b) paper.
6.2
6.2.1

Redshift Estimation
Photometric Redshift Estimation

We evaluate AstroCLIP’s performance on photometric redshift estimation. Previous studies have demonstrated that there exists significantly more redshift information in galaxy images than that which
would be extractable with simple photometry alone (Pasquet et al.
2019). As such, current machine learning methods rely on training
dedicated, convolutional neural networks to solve this type of problem, a task which typically involves developing an entire pipeline
from scratch and training a dedicated model end-to-end. Because
the learned vector embeddings produced by AstroCLIP are already
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2024)

8

Liam Parker

(a) z𝑞

im
(b) 𝑆𝐶 (zim
𝑞 ,z )

sp

sp

(c) 𝑆𝐶 (z𝑞 , zsp )

sp
(e) 𝑆𝐶 (zim
𝑞 ,z )

(d) 𝑆𝐶 (z𝑞 , zim )

sp

im
(f) 𝑆𝐶 (zim
𝑞 ,z )

(g) 𝑆𝐶 (z𝑞 , zsp )

sp

sp
(i) 𝑆𝐶 (zim
𝑞 ,z )

(h) 𝑆𝐶 (z𝑞 , zim )

Figure 2. Example retrieval from both in-modality and cross-modality searches in the AstroCLIP-aligned embedding space. In particular, for a given query galaxy
x𝑞 , we embed that galaxy using AstroCLIP as z𝑞 = AstroCLIP(x𝑞 ) and find the nearest neighbors of that galaxy using the cosine similarity, 𝑆𝐶 (z𝑞 , z𝑖≠𝑞 ),
between the query embedding and the embeddings of other galaxies in the test set. Top: From left to right, we first show the images of (a) the randomly
selected set of query galaxies, and then show the images corresponding to the closest galaxy embeddings using (b) spectrum-spectrum search, (c) image-image
search, (d) spectrum-image search, and (e) image-spectrum search. Note that superscripts indicate the input modality. Bottom: We show the retrieved spectra
of galaxies nearest to the query galaxy, pictured in each graph, using (f) image-image search, (g) spectrum-spectrum search (h) spectrum-image search, and (i)
image-spectrum search. We note that for in-modality searches, the closest neighbor to the query galaxy is by design the query galaxy itself.

informative about the input galaxies, we are instead able to use simple clustering algorithms (zero-shot) or MLP (few-shot) to extract
photometric redshift. Specifically, for zero-shot training, we apply
𝑘-Nearest Neighbor (𝑘-NN) to regress the catalog-reported redshift
of a galaxy from AstroCLIP’s embedding of that galaxy’s image. For
few-shot training, we train a single-hidden-layer MLP with width
𝑤 = 32 to perform the same regression. We include for comparison the zero- and few-shot results of our unaligned galaxy image
transformer model (DINO) as well as those of the single-modal SSL
galaxy image model from Stein et al. (2021b). We also include two
supervised baselines: a ResNet18 (He et al. 2016) trained end-toend on the galaxy images (see subsection B4) and an MLP trained
end-to-end on the galaxy (𝑔, 𝑟, 𝑧) photomtetry.
We report our results in Figure 3. In panel (c), we verify that our
supervised ResNet18 baseline is indeed able to extract more information than the photometry alone. Overall, AstroCLIP outperforms
all models, including the ResNet18 in both zero- and few-shot setMNRAS 000, 1–18 (2024)

tings. The strong zero-shot performance of the AstroCLIP model
indicates that the galaxy image embeddings are naturally organized
in the latent embedding space around galaxy redshift. Contrasting
this with the relatively worse zero-shot performance of the unaligned
image transformer model, it is clear that the CLIP alignment of the
images with the spectra has naturally organized the vector embeddings around galaxy redshift. Given that the spectra are effectively
perfectly informative about galaxy redshift, this is to be expected.
Either way, both unaligned and CLIP-aligned models outperform the
Stein et al. (2021b) image embedder, indicating that they are both
better organized around (zero-shot) and more informative (few-shot)
about galaxy redshift.

6.2.2

Redshift Estimation From Galaxy Spectra

A galaxy’s spectrum should contain near-perfect information on the
redshift of that galaxy. This information is accessible with least-

AstroCLIP

9

(a) Self-Supervised Zero-Shot Performance.

(c) Supervised Baseline Performance.

(b) Self-Supervised Few-Shot Performance.
Figure 3. Galaxy image redshift prediction and residuals. For zero-shot, we use a simple 𝑘-NN clustering algorithm on the AstroCLIP galaxy image embeddings
to predict galaxy redshift. For few-shot, we use a simple MLP to perform the same regression task. We include for comparison the few- and zero-shot performance
of our unaligned galaxy image model (DINO) and a state-of-the-art self-supervised model for galaxy images (Stein et al. 2021b). We also include two dedicated,
supervised, end-to-end models trained on galaxy images (ResNet18) and galaxy photometry (MLP). AstroCLIP performs better than its dedicated, supervised
counterpart, despite undergoing no task-specific training or finetuning.

square fitting algorithms like Redrock9 , which is used to generate
the DESI EDR-reported galaxy redshifts. However, given that galaxy
images are not perfectly informative about galaxy redshift, one would
expect that the AstroCLIP spectrum embeddings should no longer
contain perfect redshift information after CLIP alignment. Afterall,
under a pessimistic interpretation of the InfoNCE loss (see Equation 1), the AstroCLIP model should only be incentivized to keep
galaxy redshift information that is shared between galaxy images and
spectra. Therefore, there is no reason that it should not discard the
redshift information in the galaxy spectra that is not in the galaxy
images. Surprisingly, however, this does not seem to be the case.
Indeed, in evaluating the few-shot performance of the AstroCLIP
spectrum embeddings in Figure 4, we find that there is no material loss of information after CLIP-alignment with the images. This

9

https://redrock.readthedocs.io/en/latest

is encouraging, as it means that cross-modal alignment, even with
modalities that are not perfectly informative about the the underlying
physical process, can still be a good training strategy to generate a
model that keeps information. We also compare our results with a
Convolutional-Attention Network based on a state-of-the-art spectrum encoder (Melchior et al. 2023) trained end-to-end on the galaxy
spectra (see subsection B5), and find that it is in agreement with the
AstroCLIP and unaligned SSL results as well.

6.3

Galaxy Property Estimation

We evaluate AstroCLIP’s performance on galaxy property estimation
using both galaxy images and spectra as inputs. As above, these tasks
are typically performed by dedicated, end-to-end supervised models,
whereas here we are able to use simple zero- and few-shot learning on
the AstroCLIP embeddings. In particular, we evaluate AstroCLIP’s
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2024)

10

Liam Parker
Table 2. Galaxy property estimation 𝑅 2 performance. We present AstroCLIP’s zero- and few-shot performance in regressing stellar mass (𝑀∗ ),
metallicity (𝑍 𝑀𝑊 ), age (𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒 ), and specific-star formation rate (𝑠𝑆𝐹 𝑅) from
galaxy images and spectra. For zero-shot, we use 𝑘-NN and for few-shot we
use a single hidden layer MLP with width 𝑤 = 32. We include for comparison the zero- and few-shot performance of our unaligned galaxy image and
spectrum SSL transforms (unaligned trans.) and of the SSL galaxy image
model from (Stein et al. 2021b). We also include three dedicated, supervised
baselines trained on galaxy images (ResNet18), galaxy spectra (Conv+Att)
and galaxy photometry (MLP). Our models are indicated with an asterisk (∗ ).
AstroCLIP outperforms its dedicated, supervised counterparts on most tasks,
despite undergoing no task-specific training or finetuning.
Source

Method

Images

AstroCLIP
Zero-Shot∗
Few-Shot∗
Unaligned Trans.
Zero-Shot∗
Few-Shot∗
Stein et al. (2021b)
Zero-Shot
Few-Shot
ResNet18

Figure 4. Galaxy spectrum redshift few-shot prediction and residuals. We
use a simple MLP trained end-to-end on the AstroCLIP galaxy spectrum
embeddings to predict galaxy redshift. Surprisingly, AstroCLIP retains nearperfect redshift information in the spectrum embeddings even after CLIPalignment with galaxy images. Operating under a pessimistic interpretation
of the InfoNCE loss, one would expect CLIP-alignment to only retain the
redshift information that is shared by both spectra and images. We also include
a supervised Convolutional-Attention Network trained end-to-end for redshift
prediction on galaxy spectra
Spectra

zero- and few-shot performance in estimating the following galaxy
properties from the cross-matched PROVABGS (Hahn et al. 2023a)
catalog detailed in subsubsection 4.2.2:
• M∗ : Stellar Mass
• ZMW : Mass-Weighted Stellar Metallicity
• tage : Mass-Weighted Galaxy Age (Gyr)
• sSFR: Specific Star-Formation Rate, i.e. star formation activity
relative to its stellar mass (𝑆𝐹 𝑅/𝑀∗ )
For zero-shot training, we use
𝑘-NN to regress
[log 𝑀∗ , log 𝑍 𝑀𝑊 , 𝑡 𝑎𝑔𝑒 , log 𝑠𝑆𝐹 𝑅]; for few-shot training, we
use a single-hidden-layer MLP with width 𝑤 = 32 to perform the
same regression.
As in subsection 6.2, we include for comparison the zero- and
few-shot results of our unaligned galaxy image (DINOv2) model as
well as those of the galaxy image model from Stein et al. (2021b). We
also include the zero- and few-shot results of our unaligned galaxy
spectrum transformer. Finally, we include three dedicated baselines:
a ResNet18 (He et al. 2016) trained end-to-end on the galaxy images
(see subsection B4), a Convolutional-Attention Network based on
a state-of-the-art spectrum encoder (Melchior et al. 2023) trained
end-to-end on the galaxy spectra (see subsection B5), and an MLP
trained end-to-end on the galaxy (𝑔, 𝑟, 𝑧) photometry.
We report our results in Table 2. Again, AstroCLIP demonstrates
an ability to capture in its galaxy embeddings core physical properties of the input galaxy despite undergoing no task-specific training
or fine-tuning. For galaxy images, AstroCLIP outperforms all given
baselines, including previous SSL models (Stein et al. 2021b) and
the supervised image (ResNet18) and photometry (MLP) models. For
galaxy spectra, AstroCLIP outperforms the supervised photometry
baseline on all tasks, and outperforms the supervised spectrum baseline on 𝑀∗ , but performs worse on 𝑍 𝑀𝑊 and 𝑠𝑆𝐹 𝑅. As above, CLIPalignment between a less informative (image) and more informative
(spectrum) embedding has improved the zero-shot performance of
AstroCLIP on galaxy images. However, unlike with redshift estimation, AstroCLIP’s performance on spectra has deteriorated relative
to its unaligned spectrum transformer model.
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2024)

Photometry

6.4

𝑀∗

𝑍 𝑀𝑊

𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒

𝑠𝑆𝐹 𝑅

0.74
0.73

0.44
0.43

0.27
0.26

0.44
0.42

0.65
0.72

0.40
0.43

0.16
0.23

0.25
0.40

0.43
0.48
0.72

0.30
0.32
0.44

0.11
0.14
0.23

0.20
0.24
0.32

AstroCLIP
Zero-Shot∗
Few-Shot∗
Unaligned Trans.
Zero-Shot∗
Few-Shot∗
Conv+Att

0.87
0.88

0.57
0.58

0.43
0.43

0.63
0.64

0.84
0.88
0.85

0.57
0.64
0.62

0.38
0.47
0.43

0.62
0.69
0.67

MLP

0.67

0.41

0.27

0.34

Neural Posterior Estimation

We now perform the same set of redshift estimation/property prediction tasks using Neural Posterior Estimation (NPE; e.g. Rezende
& Mohamed 2015; Dinh et al. 2016; Papamakarios & Murray 2016;
Lueckmann et al. 2017; Greenberg et al. 2019). This enables us to
better understand the information content in the AstroCLIP galaxy
embeddings.
Specifically, let r represent the redshift and property vector for a
given galaxy. We are interested in estimating the posterior of r given
the AstroCLIP embedding of that galaxy, z. To that end, we train
an ensemble of normalizing flows, 𝑞 𝜙 , to estimate the conditional
distribution 𝑞 𝜙 (r|z) ≈ 𝑝(r|z) over the PROVABGS training set. We
provide the relevant background on normalizing flows in subsection A4 and the details of our implementation in subsection B6.
Once trained, if 𝑞 𝜙 represents a good estimate for 𝑝(r|z), we can
use it to efficiently calculate the posterior of r𝑖 given z𝑖 for some target
galaxy 𝑖. If this distribution is concentrated around the true value,
then z𝑖 is very informative of r𝑖 , while if this distribution is relatively
flat around the true value, it is less informative. Repeating this process
over the held-out test dataset therefore provides a strong indication
of the information content in the AstroCLIP galaxy embeddings.
Typically, this is performed by calculating the negative log-likelihood
(NLL) over the test set as:
𝐾

NLL =

1 ∑︁
log 𝑞 𝜙 (r𝑖 |]z𝑖 )
𝑁

(5)

𝑖=1

We present the AstroCLIP and baseline NLLs in Table 3. Ultimately, these results corroborate the results presented in subsection 6.3. Specifically, the AstroCLIP image embeddings once again

AstroCLIP
Table 3. Average normalizing flow estimate of the negative log-likelihood
(NLL) of the true redshift and galaxy property vector, r, given the input
embedding z. In particular, we train an ensemble of normalizing flows 𝑞 𝜙
to estimate the conditional distribution 𝑞 𝜙 (r|z) ≈ 𝑝 (r|z). We then use our
normalizing flow to calculate the log-likelihood of the true r given the input
embedding z. AstroCLIP outperforms its dedicated, supervised counterparts
on most tasks, despite undergoing no task-specific training or finetuning. Note
that lower numbers are better.
Source

Method

Images

AstroCLIP∗

spiral-arms, bulge-size, edge-on-bulge, spiral-winding, merging). Finally, CLIP-alignment between images and spectra - in this case the
less informative modality - has not materially degraded model performance on images; the average accuracy of the unaligned DINOv2
model (78%) is roughly in-line with that of AstroCLIP (77%), while
AstroCLIP’s performance is even slightly better on the disk-edge-on
and bar questions.

Neg. Log-Likelihood

Unaligned Transformer∗
Stein et al. (2021b)
ResNet18

0.76 ± 0.00
0.81 ± 0.01
1.09 ± 0.04
0.77 ± 0.00

Spectra

AstroCLIP∗
Unaligned Transformer∗
Conv+Att

0.14 ± 0.03
0.00 ± 0.04
0.26 ± 0.00

Photometry

MLP

0.92 ± 0.05

outperforms both image and photometry supervised baselines, as
well as the Stein et al. (2021b) SSL model. Interestingly, the AstroCLIP spectrum embeddings also outperform the dedicated spectrum
baseline.
In addition to providing a concrete measure of the information
content, 𝑞 𝜙 also enables us to efficiently sample from 𝑝(r|z). We
present sample distributions for a randomly chosen galaxy, along
with the true redshift/properties of that galaxy, in Figure D3a and
Figure D3b respectively. We also verify that 𝑞 𝜙 is well-calibrated in
section E.
6.5

11

Galaxy Morphology Classification

Finally, we evaluate AstroCLIP’s performance on galaxy morphology classification. As above, we evaluate the model’s few-shot performance by training a 4-layer MLP with width 𝑤 = 128 to regress the
Galaxy Zoo DECaLS morphology classification from the AstroCLIP
image embeddings over the training set. We report the performance
of our model on the held-out test set, where we only include performance on galaxies on which more than 34 volunteers provided
classifications; this ensures that each answer is well-measured, and
is convention in the supervised works from Walmsley et al. (2022b).
We report the accuracy and F1 score for each question over the
test set, where we weight the accuracy and F1 score by the support
for each class; importantly, not every class has binary classifications, as some classes - like spiral arm count - have up to 6 classes.
We include for comparison the few-shot results of our unaligned
galaxy image (DINO v2) model, as well as those of the galaxy image
model from Stein et al. (2021b). Additionally, we include the reported accuracy/F1-score of the supervised Bayesian classifier from
Walmsley et al. (2022b).
We present our results in Figure 5. We don’t expect any classifier
to be able to achieve perfect accuracy on the given tasks, as the
volunteer labels themselves possess some intrinsic uncertainty about
the underlying galaxy. Therefore, we take the supervised Bayesian
classifier as the upper-bound on the achievable accuracy for F1-score
of a data-driven model in this particular classification task. We also
provide the raw, numerical results for the various models in Table E1.
Overall, AstroCLIP achieves relatively strong performance on all
questions. Raw accuracy score ranges from 97% on disk-edge-on to
56% on bar. Overall, AstroCLIP’s performance is at least 90% of
that of the supervised model on 6/10 of the questions (disk-edge-on,

7

Conclusions

We have presented AstroCLIP, a cross-modal foundation model for
galaxies. Our results demonstrate the potential for cross-modal contrastive pre-training to achieve high quality foundation models for
astronomical data, which can be used for a variety of downstream
tasks. These include accurate in-modal and cross-modal semantic
similarity search, photometric redshift estimation, galaxy property
prediction from both images and spectra, and galaxy morphology
classification.
Reinforcing our optimism for this approach, our results demonstrate that even if diverse modalities are not all perfectly informative
about downstream tasks, the contrastive learning objective is still able
to preserve modality-specific information that exceeds that contained
in other modalities. This is exemplified by the fact that our spectral
embeddings exhibit an emergent ability to retain most of their redshift information while our image embeddings exhibit an emergent
ability to retain most of their galaxy morphology information.
Ultimately, we contend that the model’s high performance on a
wide variety of downstream tasks and its ability to retain modalityspecific information are key properties to allow the community to
build higher-level models that rely on off-the-shelf astronomical embeddings, just as CLIP language-image embeddings have enabled a
wide variety of downstream applications in computer vision.

8

Acknowledgements

We gratefully acknowledge the Flatiron Institute for its support. The
computations in this work were run at facilities supported by the
Scientific Computing Core at the Flatiron Institute, a division of the
Simons Foundation. M.P. is supported by the Department of Energy,
Office of Science under contract number DE-AC02-05CH11231.
This work was granted access to the HPC/AI resources of IDRIS
under the allocation 2023-A0151014662 made by GENCI.

9

Data Availability

All the code and resources for this paper will be made available
upon acceptance. This includes the code that defines the model, the
training codes, and the code used to generate the various results.
Additionally, we will publish the trained model which can be used
to further evaluate performance or perform additional downstream
tasks. The underlying data are all publicly available and all of the
software used in this work is open source.

REFERENCES
Bahdanau D., Cho K., Bengio Y., 2014, arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473
Balestriero R., et al., 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12210
Bommasani R., et al., 2021, arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2024)

12

Liam Parker

(a) Accuracy.

(b) F1 Score.

Figure 5. Galaxy morphology classification results. We train a simple MLP on the AstroCLIP galaxy image embeddings to predict the Galaxy Zoo DECaLS
GZD-5 morphology classification of that galaxy. We report both the class-weighted accuracy and F1-score of the various models. We also provide the reported
class-weighted accuracy/F1-score of the supervised Bayesian classifier (Walmsley et al. 2022b) for each question. Overall, AstroCLIP achieves relatively strong
performance on all questions, and clearly outperforms a state-of-the-art self-supervised model for galaxy images (Stein et al. 2021b). Additionally, as in Figure 4,
cross-alignment of two different modalities has not materially degraded the performance of the more informative modality, as the difference between the
unaligned transformer image model (DINOv2) and AstroCLIP model is negligible.

Buciluǎ C., Caruana R., Niculescu-Mizil A., 2006, in Proceedings of the 12th
ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and
data mining. pp 535–541
Caron M., Bojanowski P., Joulin A., Douze M., 2018, in Proceedings of the
European conference on computer vision (ECCV). pp 132–149
Caron M., Touvron H., Misra I., Jégou H., Mairal J., Bojanowski P., Joulin
A., 2021, in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
computer vision. pp 9650–9660
Chen T., Kornblith S., Norouzi M., Hinton G., 2020, A Simple Framework for
Contrastive Learning of Visual Representations (arXiv:2002.05709)
Cheng T.-Y., Li N., Conselice C. J., Aragón-Salamanca A., Dye S., Metcalf
R. B., 2020, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 494,
3750
Collaboration D., et al., 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.06308
Devlin J., Chang M.-W., Lee K., Toutanova K., 2018, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.04805
Dey A., et al., 2019, arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.08657
Dinh L., Sohl-Dickstein J., Bengio S., 2016, arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.08803
Dosovitskiy A., et al., 2020, arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929
Durkan C., Bekasov A., Murray I., Papamakarios G., 2019, Advances in
neural information processing systems, 32
Fang Z., Wang J., Wang L., Zhang L., Yang Y., Liu Z., 2021, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2101.04731
Girdhar R., El-Nouby A., Liu Z., Singh M., Alwala K. V., Joulin A., Misra I.,
2023, in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. pp 15180–15190
Greenberg D., Nonnenmacher M., Macke J., 2019, in International Conference on Machine Learning. pp 2404–2414
Grill J.-B., et al., 2020, Advances in neural information processing systems,
33, 21271
Gutmann M., Hyvärinen A., 2010, in Teh Y. W., Titterington M., eds,
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research Vol. 9, Proceedings of
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2024)

the Thirteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
Statistics. PMLR, Chia Laguna Resort, Sardinia, Italy, pp 297–304,
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v9/gutmann10a.html
Hahn C., et al., 2023a, The Astronomical Journal, 165, 253
Hahn C., et al., 2023b, The American Astronomical Society, 945, 16
Hayat M. A., Stein G., Harrington P. Z., Luki’c Z., Mustafa M. A., 2020, The
Astrophysical Journal Letters, 911
Hayat M. A., Harrington P. Z., Stein G., Luki’c Z., Mustafa M., 2021, ArXiv,
abs/2101.04293
He K., Zhang X., Ren S., Sun J., 2016, in Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp 770–778
He K., Fan H., Wu Y., Xie S., Girshick R., 2020, in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp
9729–9738
He K., Chen X., Xie S., Li Y., Dollár P., Girshick R., 2021, Masked Autoencoders Are Scalable Vision Learners (arXiv:2111.06377)
Huertas-Company M., Lanusse F., 2023, PASA, 40, e001
Ivezić et. al. Ž., 2019, The Astrophysical Journal, 873, 111
Ivezić Ž., Connolly A. J., VanderPlas J. T., Gray A., 2020, Statistics, data
mining, and machine learning in astronomy: a practical Python guide for
the analysis of survey data. Princeton University Press
Laureĳs R., et al., 2011, arXiv preprint arXiv:1110.3193
Lemos P., Coogan A., Hezaveh Y., Perreault-Levasseur L., 2023, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.03026
Liang Y., Melchior P., Lu S., Goulding A., Ward C., 2023a, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.02496
Liang Y., Melchior P., Hahn C., Shen J., Goulding A., Ward C., 2023b, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2307.07664
Lueckmann J.-M., Goncalves P. J., Bassetto G., Öcal K., Nonnenmacher M.,
Macke J. H., 2017, Advances in neural information processing systems,
30
Margalef-Bentabol B., Huertas-Company M., Charnock T., Margalef-

AstroCLIP
Bentabol C., Bernardi M., Dubois Y., Storey-Fisher K., Zanisi L., 2020,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 496, 2346
McAllester D., Stratos K., 2020, in International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Statistics. pp 875–884
McCabe M., et al., 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02994
Melchior P., Liang Y., Hahn C., Goulding A., 2023, The Astronomical Journal,
166, 74
Nguyen T., Brandstetter J., Kapoor A., Gupta J. K., Grover A., 2023, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2301.10343
Oquab M., et al., 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193
Papamakarios G., Murray I., 2016, Advances in neural information processing
systems, 29
Pasquet J., Bertin E., Treyer M., Arnouts S., Fouchez D., 2019, Astronomy
& Astrophysics, 621, A26
Portillo S. K., Parejko J. K., Vergara J. R., Connolly A. J., 2020, The Astronomical Journal, 160, 45
Radford A., Wu J., Child R., Luan D., Amodei D., Sutskever I., et al., 2019,
OpenAI blog, 1, 9
Radford A., et al., 2021, in International Conference on Machine Learning.
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:231591445
Rezende D., Mohamed S., 2015, in International conference on machine
learning. pp 1530–1538
Ruppert D., 1988, Technical report, Efficient estimations from a slowly convergent Robbins-Monro process. Cornell University Operations Research
and Industrial Engineering
Sablayrolles A., Douze M., Schmid C., Jégou H., 2018, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.03198
Serra J., Pascual S., Karatzoglou A., 2018, in CCIA. pp 120–129
Song J., Ermon S., 2019, arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.06222
Stein G., Blaum J., Harrington P. Z., Medan T., Lukic Z., 2021a, The Astrophysical Journal, 932
Stein G., Harrington P. Z., Blaum J., Medan T., Lukic Z., 2021b, ArXiv,
abs/2110.13151
Subramanian S., Harrington P., Keutzer K., Bhimji W., Morozov D., Mahoney
M. W., Gholami A., 2024, Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 36
Sun Q., Fang Y., Wu L., Wang X., Cao Y., 2023, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.15389
Teimoorinia H., Archinuk F., Woo J., Shishehchi S., Bluck A. F., 2022, The
Astronomical Journal, 163, 71
Tong Z., Song Y., Wang J., Wang L., 2022, in Oh A. H., Agarwal A., Belgrave
D., Cho K., eds, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
https://openreview.net/forum?id=AhccnBXSne
Vaswani A., Shazeer N., Parmar N., Uszkoreit J., Jones L., Gomez A. N.,
Kaiser Ł., Polosukhin I., 2017, Advances in neural information processing
systems, 30
Walmsley M., Slĳepcevic I. V., Bowles M., Scaife A. M., 2022a, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2206.11927
Walmsley M., et al., 2022b, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 509, 3966
Zhai X., Kolesnikov A., Houlsby N., Beyer L., 2022, in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp
12104–12113
Zhou J., Wei C., Wang H., Shen W., Xie C., Yuille A., Kong T., 2021, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2111.07832
van den Oord A., Li Y., Vinyals O., 2018, CoRR, abs/1807.03748

A

Relevant Background

A1

Masked Modelling

As stated above, given an input with random masked patches, the
objective in masked modeling is to learn to fill in these randomly
masked patches using the remaining unmasked parts of the input.
Formally, let us consider an input x composed of a set of 𝑁 patches,
𝑁 . Then, we randomly mask a subset of these patches according
{x𝑖 }𝑖=1

13

𝑁 ,
to a prediction ratio 𝑟 to produce x̂ = {x̂𝑖 |(1−𝑚 𝑖 )x𝑖 +𝑚 𝑖 e [MASK] }𝑖=1
where e [MASK] represents the value of the masked patch and m ∈
{0, 1} 𝑁 represents the random mask. Let 𝑔 𝜃 be our neural network;
then, the projections of each unmasked patch 𝑖 is x𝑖 = 𝑔 𝜃 (x)𝑖 and the
projections for each masked patch 𝑖 is x̂𝑖 = 𝑔 𝜃 ( x̂)𝑖 . The objective in
masked modeling is then to minimize the mean-squared error (MSE)
loss between the x𝑖 and x̂𝑖 for the same 𝑖, given as
𝐾

LMM =

𝑁

1 ∑︁ ∑︁
m𝑖 · (x𝑖 − x̂𝑖 ) 2 ,
𝑁𝐾

(A1)

𝑗=1 𝑖=1

where 𝑖 iterates over all of the patches in a given input x and 𝑗 iterates
over all of the 𝐾 inputs in the training dataset. This forces the model to
learn to infer the masked patches from the unmasked patches, thereby
encouraging the model to learn robust feature representations of the
input that capture the structure and content of the input. Then, when
an unmasked input is fed to the model, the learned projection of that
input should represent a powerful, low-dimensional embedding.

A2

Self-Distillation with No Labels

As stated above, self-distillation with no labels relies on extracting
meaningful embeddings by exploiting the dynamics between the
training interplay of a “teacher” and “student” neural network. We
first introduce knowledge distillation as relevant background, and
then introduce self-distillation as a modification of this framework
that enables this type of training in the absence of a fixed, pre-trained
teacher network. Finally, we introduce the maskedd image modeling
extension proposed by Zhou et al. (2021), and its culmination in a
unified framework in DINOv2 Oquab et al. (2023).

A2.1

Knowledge Distillation

Knowledge distillation (Buciluǎ et al. 2006) is a type of training
regime that has historically been used to train a small student network
to mimic the output of a large, pre-trained teacher network. The
ultimate goal of this training scheme is to compress the size of the
teacher network.
Concretely, let 𝑓𝑡 represent the teacher neural network, and 𝑔𝑠
represent the student neural network; then, the objective in knowledge
distillation is to minimize the cross-entropy between the outputs of
both networks for the same input x, such that:
LKD = −

𝐾
∑︁

𝑃𝑡 (x 𝑗 ) log 𝑃𝑠 (x 𝑗 ).

(A2)

𝑗=1

Here, 𝐾 is the size of the training dataset, and 𝑃 represents a sort of
probability distribution of the output of 𝑓 or 𝑔, which is attained by
using a softmax function to normalize the output of the network:
exp( 𝑓 (x)𝑖 )
𝑃(x)𝑖 = Í𝐾
.
𝑘=1 exp( 𝑓 (x) 𝑘 )

(A3)

Knowledge distillation is a powerful compression technique, but it is
not applicable to SSL training directly, as it relies on a pre-trained
fixed teacher network.

A2.2

Self-Distillation

To enable knowledge distillation in the absence of a pre-trained
fixed teacher network, knowledge DIstillation with NO labels (DINO;
Caron et al. 2021), or self-distillation, has recently been proposed.
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2024)

14

Liam Parker

Rather than distilling knowledge from a pre-trained teacher, selfdistillation works by instead distilling knowledge from past iterations
of the student network itself.
Concretely, the student and teacher networks share the same architecture 𝑓 , albeit different weights. The weights of the student
network, 𝜃 𝑠 , are updated via gradient descent, as is typical of machine learning training. However, the weights of the teacher network,
𝜃 𝑡 , are not given access to gradient information. Instead, these are dynamically built from past iterations of the student network’s weights.
This is done using an exponential moving average (EMA) of the
student network’s weights (He et al. 2020), such that
𝜃 𝑡 ←− 𝜆𝜃 𝑡 + (1 − 𝜆)𝜃 𝑠 ,

(A4)

where 𝜆 is a tunable hyperparameter commonly referred to as the
smoothing or time constant.
By composing the teacher network as an iterated average of the
student network’s past weights, the teacher network effectively undergoes a ensembling technique. This type of model ensembling has
been well-explored in the literature (Ruppert 1988), and has been
shown to lead to better performance and generalization in supervised
models. In the context of DINO, it too leads to a teacher network
that performs better than its student (Caron et al. 2018). Therefore,
the teacher network, like in vanilla knowledge distillation, is still
able to guide the student network during training by providing better
representation outputs.
In practice, DINO adds additional elements to this self-distillation
scheme. For one, to promote local-to-global correspondence, a set of
𝑉 different “views” are generated for each input, which in the case of
DINO is an image. 𝑉 consists of both “global” views, which consist of
large crops of the image, and “local” views, which consist of smaller
crops of the image. The entire set of 𝑉 is passed to the student,
while only the global views are passed to the teacher. The student
and teacher must then still generate the same output representation.
Additionally, to prevent a trivial collapse between the representations learned by the student and teacher networks of the inputs,
DINO both centers and sharpens the outputs of the teacher network
(Caron et al. 2021).
A2.3

image-BERT Pre-Training with Online Tokenizer

While not originally introduced in a self-distillation context, MIM
(see subsection 2.2) has been extended to this regime in recent works
like image-BERT pre-training with Online Tokenizer (iBOT; Zhou
et al. 2021). Specifically, given some input image x, a masked view
of the input, x̂, is fed to the student network, while the unmasked
view x is fed to the teacher. Thus, for any given masked patch 𝑖,
the student network outputs ẑ𝑖𝑠 = 𝑃𝑖𝑠 ( x̂), while the teacher network
outputs z𝑖𝑡 = 𝑃𝑖𝑠 (x𝑡 ). These probabilities, like in subsection A2, are
once again computed using a softmax function. Then, Equation A2
can be easily rewritten as
LMIM = −

𝐾 ∑︁
𝑁
∑︁

𝑚 𝑖 · 𝑃𝑡𝑖 (x 𝑗 ) log 𝑃𝑖𝑠 ( x̂ 𝑗 ).

(A5)

𝑗=1 𝑖=1

Functionally, iBOT includes in its loss term some additional complications. For one, iBOT performs MIM on two augmented views of
x simultaneously. Then, Equation A5 is symmetrized by averaging
another cross-entropy term between patches of the other augmented
view. Additionally, iBOT includes in its loss another self-distillationlike term between the global representation of the student and teacher
network. As in subsection A2, the teachers weights are updated as
an EMA of the student weights.
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2024)

A2.4

DINO v2

self-DIstillation with NO labels version 2 (DINO v2; Oquab et al.
2023) is an extension of the DINO self-distillation framework that
incorporates the MIM objective from image-BERT Pre-Training with
Online Tokenizer (Zhou et al. 2021) into the DINO objective. For
any given input x, DINO v2 computes:
• The LKD loss between the features extracted by the student
network from both global and local crops of x and the teacher network
from the global crops of x.
• The LMIM loss between the randomly masked patches given to
the student and the corresponding, unmasked patches given to the
teacher.
For both losses, softmax functions are applied to the outputs of the
networks, and centering is applied to the teacher outputs to prevent
collapse. The composite DINOv2 loss is then given by
LDINOv2 = 𝑤 1 · LKD + 𝑤 2 · LMIM ,

(A6)

where 𝑤 1 and 𝑤 2 are scalars that weight the relative importance of
both the DINO and MIM losses.
In practice, DINOv2 also adds a regularization term to the above
composite loss, called the KoLeo regularizer (Sablayrolles et al.
2018). This regularizer encourages a uniform span within each batch,
and is given by
𝑛

L 𝑘𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑜 =

1 ∑︁
log min ∥ x𝑖 − x 𝑗 ∥ 2 ,
𝑗≠𝑖
𝑛

(A7)

𝑖=1

where 𝑛 represents the total size of the batch.
Ultimately, the DINOv2 loss has demonstrated superior performance on a variety of downstream tasks including semantic segmentation, image classification, depth estimation, video processing, etc.,
and a variety of ablation tests have demonstrated the importance of
such a composite loss (Oquab et al. 2023).
A3

Transformers

Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) are a type of neural network architecture that employs an attention mechanism (Bahdanau et al. 2014)
to attend to and contextualize various parts of its input sequence.
Here we focus on scaled dot-product attention, a specific implementation of attention, that requires three inputs - queries, 𝑄, keys,
𝐾, and values, 𝑉. Intuitively, 𝑄 represents the set of elements that
are seeking information, 𝐾 represents the elements that are being
queried against, and 𝑉 represents the information that is retrieved
based on the similarity between 𝑄 and 𝐾. In this framework, each
query in 𝑄 is compared against all keys in 𝐾 to compute a set of
attention weights as


𝑄𝐾 𝑇
.
(A8)
𝐴 = softmax √
𝑑𝐾
The output is normalized by the dimensionality of the keys (𝑑 𝐾 ) to
prevent overly large dot product values, which could lead to gradient
vanishing or exploding problems. Ultimately, these attention scores
encode how much each value in 𝑉 should contribute to the output;
indeed, the final output of the attention mechanism is computed as a
weighted sum of 𝑉, where the weight of each value is determined by
𝐴 as


𝑄𝐾 𝑇
Output = 𝐴𝑉 = softmax √
𝑉.
(A9)
𝑑𝐾
When 𝑄 and 𝐾 are the same sequence, the algorithm above is referred

AstroCLIP

15

to as self-attention, whereas when 𝑄 and 𝐾 are different sequences,
the algorithm is called cross-attention. Ultimately, in a simple regression setting, this mechanism allows the network to, for a given entry
in the query sequence, “pay attention” to the most relevant parts of
the rest of the input sequence, calculated in 𝐴, and use the associated
values to produce an output. Moreover, the attention mechanism is
permutation-invariant and agnostic to sequence length.
In practice, trainable weights are applied to the queries, keys, and
values before they perform the attention operation. Moreover, multiple attention heads are concatenated at each step, allowing the model
to simultaneously attend to information from different representation
subspaces at different positions. This is known as multi-head attention, a key feature that enhances the transformer’s ability to capture
a wide array of dependencies in the input data. Each attention head
can be thought of as an independent feature extractor, focusing on
different aspects of the input sequence. By concatenating the outputs of these heads, the model integrates diverse perspectives into a
comprehensive representation.
Mathematically, the multi-head attention mechanism can be described as follows:

In many cases, we are interested in the posterior distribution
𝑝(𝜃|z), where z is some summary statistic of the data. Luckily, the
theory of normalizing flows is easily generalized to conditional distributions, as we simply condition the transformations 𝑓 on z to
produce the complex, conditionally transformed variable 𝜃 = 𝑓 (x).
Sampling and scoring is analogous to the argument presented above
using this conditioning.
Typically, 𝑓 is parameterized using a neural network 𝑞 𝜙 (𝜃|z),
where 𝜙 represents the network parameters. The network parameters
are generated by minimizing the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
between 𝑝(𝜃, z) and 𝑞 𝜙 (𝜃, z) 𝑝(z), which is equivalent to maximizing
the log-likelihood over the training set as

MultiHead(𝑄, 𝐾, 𝑉) = Concat(head1 , head2 , ..., headℎ )𝑊 𝑂 (A10)

We provide the implementations details - i.e. the specifics of model
architecture, training procedure, hyperparameters, etc. - for the various models trained in the previous sections here.

where each head is computed as:
𝑄

head𝑖 = Attention(𝑄𝑊𝑖 , 𝐾𝑊𝑖𝐾 , 𝑉𝑊𝑖𝑉 )

1 ∑︁
log 𝑞 𝜙 (𝜃 𝑖 |z𝑖 ),
𝑁

(A13)

where 𝑞 𝜙 (𝜃 𝑖 |z𝑖 ) is given by the scoring function above.

B

Implementation Details

(A11)

𝑄
𝑊𝑖 , 𝑊𝑖𝐾 , and 𝑊𝑖𝑉 are the weight matrices for the queries, keys, and
values, respectively, for the 𝑖-th head. 𝑊 𝑂 is the output weight matrix

that combines the heads’ outputs.
In practice, transformers are typically composed of several layers, each containing a multi-head attention mechanism followed by
a position-wise fully connected feed-forward network. This design
allows the transformer to process all parts of the input sequence
in parallel, significantly improving efficiency over architectures that
process inputs sequentially. Between each layer, normalization and
residual connections are employed to enhance training stability and
facilitate the flow of gradients during backpropagation.
A4

𝑁

𝜙∗ = argmax 𝜙

Normalizing Flows

Normalizing flows are a type of generative model that are commonly
used in Neural Posterior Estimation (NPE; e.g. Rezende & Mohamed
2015; Dinh et al. 2016; Papamakarios & Murray 2016; Lueckmann
et al. 2017; Greenberg et al. 2019) to estimate either unconditional
or conditional probability distributions. These are useful as often
times the dimensionality and complexity of the distribution of interest
render it impossible to estimate by sampling techniques alone.
A normalizing flow iteratively transforms a simple multivariate
noise source, often the standard multivariate Normal distribution 𝑥 ∼
N (0, I5×5 ), into the complex parameter distribution 𝜃 ∼ Θ through a
series of learned, vector-valued bĳective (invertible) transformations
𝑓 = 𝑓1 ◦ 𝑓2 ◦...◦ 𝑓𝑛 . This set-up allows them to sample the probability
density of the data 𝜃 by simply sampling the latent variable x, and
then transforming the variable to 𝜃 through as 𝑓 (x). Θ can then be
scored using the multivariate substitution rule as
!
𝑛
Ö
𝜕 𝑓𝑙−1 (𝜃)
−1
det
𝑝(𝜃) = 𝜋( 𝑓 (𝜃))
,
(A12)
𝜕𝜃
𝑙=1

where a simple inductive argument is used on 𝑓 . Note that the
bĳective transformations 𝑓 must have easy-to-compute Jacobians
𝜕 𝑓𝑙 ( 𝜃 )
det 𝜕𝜃
and must be easy to invert for this task to be computationally tractable.

B1

Galaxy Image Transformer

B1.1

Model Details

While we experimented with various architecture sizes, we find that
we achieve best performance when using a ViT-L with patch size
𝑃 = 12. Given that our multi-band images have 𝐶 = 3 channels, this
results in flattened vectors of size x 𝑝 ∈ R432 . We project these to a
𝐷 = 1024 dimensional embedding using Equation 3. For our ViT, we
use 24 transformer layers, 16 heads in the mult-head self-attention,
and MLP hidden layers of width 4 × 1024 = 4096. Additionally, we
use two separate projection heads for both our student and teacher
ViT backbones, each of which has 2048 hidden MLP dimensions
and 3 layers. This configuration results in a model with roughly 307
million trainable parameters.

B1.2

Training Details

Pretraining is performed over 500 epochs on 16 H100 GPUs using the
Adam optimizer with a batch size of 96 images per GPU, resulting in
a total batch size of 1536. We linearly increase our learning rate from
0 to 0.004 over the first 80 epochs of training, after which we decay
the learning rate with a cosine schedule. The momentum between
student and teacher, 𝜆, is increased according to a cosine schedule
from 0.994 to 1.0 during training. We set our weight decay to a fixed
value of 0.001, as we find that increasing our weight decay during
training leads to underfitting. We weight the loss between DINO and
iBOT losses as one-to-one. Training in this regime takes roughly 48
hours.

B2

Galaxy Spectrum Transformer

B2.1

Model Implementation

After experimenting with various patch sizes, we achieve best results
when using a patch size of 𝐵 = 20 and an overlapping segment of
𝐴 = 10. We also experimented with various model architectures,
and find that we achieve best performance when using a transformer
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2024)

16

Liam Parker

with with 𝐷 = 768 embedding dimensions, 6 transformer blocks,
and 6 heads in our multi-head attention module. This results in a
transformer with roughly 43.2 million trainable parameters.

B5

Spectrum Property Regressor

In our implementation, we use 4 cross-attention heads followed by
two linear layers with 512 embedding dimensions. We also use layer
norm and GeLU activation functions. The output of this network
is the final embedding of the galaxy, z ∈ R512 , and should reside
in a shared, aligned embedding space after the image and spectrum
transformers have been pre-trained and successfully aligned to create
AstroCLIP.

We use a modified version of the time-series encoder from Serra
et al. (2018). This network first applies four convolutional layers with
[8, 16, 16, 32] kernels with PReLU activation functions and dropout.
Then, the output of the last convolutional layer split into two halves
along its channel dimensions. A dot-product attention is then applied,
where one half of the channels serve as the keys (𝐾) and the other
half serve as the values (𝑉) for the attention calculation. The attended
features are then compressed into a latent representation through an
MLP with [32, 32] hidden dimensions. We chose this architecture
as it is used as the encoder in a current state-of-the-art spectrum
autoencoder setting (Melchior et al. 2023).
We train two versions of the model: one to regress galaxy
redshift, and one to regress the galaxy property vector 𝜃 =
log 𝑀∗ , log 𝑍 𝑀𝑊 , 𝑡 𝑎𝑔𝑒 , log 𝑠𝑆𝐹 𝑅}. We train both over the PROVABGS training set for 100 epochs using the Adam Optimizer and an
MSE loss. At each epoch, we evaluate the model’s performance on
the validation set, and take as our best model the model with the best
validation performance. We report our results on the held-out test
set. We train the model on a single A100 GPU with a batch size of
512, resulting in roughly 10 minutes of training time.

B3.2

B6

B2.2

Training Details

We pretrain our spectrum encoder on the full DESI spectra dataset
using a mask-filling loss. Training is performed on 4 H100 GPUs for
a total of 500 epochs, resulting in a total training time of roughly 24
hours.
B3

AstroCLIP Model

B3.1

Model Implementation

Training Details

Normalizing Flow Model

We train our models on the training split of our paired imagespectrum dataset. We use a queue length of 𝐾 = 1024 imagespectrum pairs. During training, we perform basic data augmentation
with random vertical and horizontal flips and random rotations on the
images. We train our models using the AdamW optimizer with a base
learning rate of 0.0001 with a cosine scheduler and a weight decay
of 0.01. We train our model for 500 iterations on a single H100 GPU,
which results in roughly 48 hours of training time. Finally, similar
to the findings in Girdhar et al. (2023), we find better performance
by fixing the value of the temperature parameter 𝜏 in Equation 1 as
opposed to letting it free. We also set the logit scale in our loss to a
fixed value of 15.5.

For our problem setting, we use a stack of quadratic rational spline
coupling bĳections (Durkan et al. 2019) as our bĳective transformations 𝑓 . Quadratic spline transformations involve the use of piecewise
quadratic functions to create smooth, continuous mappings between
variables. We condition these splines on the embedding z with a
fully-connected MLP. For each of our 10 random flows, we randomly choose the number of transformations as U{3, 4, 5, 6} and
the random number of MLP hidden dimensions as U [32, 128]. We
train each flow using an 80/20 train-validation split on the training set
and prevent overfitting by stopping training when the validation loglikelihood has not improved for 20 epochs. We report the negative
log-likelihood over the held-out test set as our results.

B4

C

ResNet18 Image Regressor

We use a modified version of the ResNet18 vision model from He
et al. (2016). This model is part of the Residual Network family,
known for its ability to train very deep networks through the use
of shortcut connections that skip one or more layers. We modify
the architecture by changing the first convolutional layer to accept
3-channel (𝑟, 𝑔, 𝑏) images, and set the kernel size to 7 and the stride
length to 2. We also add a final, fully-connected layer that maps the
512-dimensional feature vectors produced by the preceding convolutional and pooling layers to the desired number of output dimensions.
We train two versions of the model: one to regress galaxy
redshift, and one to regress the galaxy property vector 𝜃 =
log 𝑀∗ , log 𝑍 𝑀𝑊 , 𝑡 𝑎𝑔𝑒 , log 𝑠𝑆𝐹 𝑅}. We train both over the PROVABGS training set for 100 epochs using the Adam Optimizer and an
MSE loss. During training, we prevent model overfitting by applying a number of random augmentations, namely random horizontal
and vertical flips with 𝑝 = 0.5 and random Gaussian blurring with
kernel size 5 and 𝜎 ∼ U (0, 2). We initialize the learning rate at
𝜆 = 5 × 10 −4 . At each epoch, we evaluate the model’s performance
on the validation set, and take as our best model the model with the
best validation performance. We report our results on the held-out
test set. We train the model on a single A100 GPU with a batch size
of 512, resulting in roughly 1 hour of training time.
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2024)

Extended Results

We report a variety of additional results below.

D

Attention Maps and Performance of Spectrum Encoder

We look at the attention maps of the cross-attention layer of the
spectrum encoder, described in subsubsection B2.1. These plots can
help interpret what information the model is looking at when building
its representation of the spectrum.
Figure D1 shows a number of examples of these attention maps.
We see that the different attention heads have specialized to look for
different features. Head 1 seems to be looking at the two extremes of
the spectrum which would make it sensitive to different spectral tilts.
Head 3 seems to be sensitive to peaks around the 9k 𝐴˚ range. However,
it is important to note that this cross-attention layer comes after the
6 layers of self-attention of the pre-trained model. At this stage of
the network, information about different sections of the spectrum
have likely diffused throughout the entire sequence and therefore
the attention maps potentially access information from parts of the
spectrum where the attention is zero.
Additionally, we evaluate the performance of the mask-filling
model pretrained on the spectra in Figure D2. In these figures, the

AstroCLIP

(a) Example 1

(b) Example 2

(c) Example 3

(d) Example 4

17

Figure D1. Randomly chosen examples of attention maps from the cross-attention layer of the self-supervised spectrum mask-filling model. These visualizations
illustrate the model’s focus primarily on emission lines within the spectrum, highlighted by pronounced peaks in the attention matrices at these regions,
demonstrating the model’s ability to identify and emphasize significant spectral features effectively.

(a) Example 1

(b) Example 2

(c) Example 3

(d) Example 4

Figure D2. Randomly chosen examples of the performance of the self-supervised trained spectrum mask filling transformer. The spectrum transformer is broadly
able to infer the correct shape of missing regions of the spectrum from the broader spectrum context.

MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2024)

18

Liam Parker

shaded region denotes the area where the spectrum was zeroed out
when passed to the model. The various inserts show close-ups of
the smoothed ground-truth (by taking averages of 20 bins) as well
as the prediction of the model. We see that the model has learned
to reproduce the prominent features of the spectrum. For example,
in both Figure D2a and Figure D2b a number of the masked regions
have fallen on absorption and emmission lines. We see that the model
can reproduce these features with high precision.

Table E1. Galaxy morphology classification results. We train a simple MLP
on the AstroCLIP galaxy image embeddings to predict the Galaxy Zoo DECaLS GZD-5 morphology classification of that galaxy. We report both the
class-weighted accuracy and F1-score of the various models for each question.
Overall, AstroCLIP achieves relatively strong performance on all questions,
and clearly outperforms a state-of-the-art self-supervised model for galaxy
images (Stein et al. 2021b). We highlight in bold the best results on each
question, excluding the reported ZooBot results.
(a) Accuracy Scores

D1

Normalizing Flow Sample Posterior Estimation

We present in Figure D3a and Figure D3b the sampled posterior from
our trained normalizing flow 𝑞 𝜙 (𝜃|z) for a randomly chosen galaxy
image and spectrum respectively, where the flow is conditioned on
the AstroCLIP embedding of that image or spectrum.

E

TARP Expected Coverage Tests

We ensure that our normalizing flows are well-calibrated using Tests
of Accuracy with Random Point (TARP) Expected Coverage Probability (ECP) tests. These have been shown to be necessary and sufficient for exploring the optimality of the posterior estimate (Lemos
et al. 2023). The TARP method is designed to evaluate the accuracy
of generative posterior estimators by creating spherical credible regions centered on a specified random reference point, 𝜃 𝑟 , and then
assessing whether these regions capture the true parameter values.
We evaluate the TARP ECP over the full dimensionality of our
property space, and provide the results for the ensemble of models
trained from images/photometry and from spectra in Figure E1 and
Figure E2 respectively; if the ECP follows the diagonal line, i.e. it is
equal to the confidence level for every 𝛼 ∈ [0, 1], then the estimator
is well calibrated. As shown in the figures, all models are indeed well
calibrated on our held-out test set on most of the property estimation
tasks other than log 𝑠𝑆𝐹 𝑅, on which some of the models are either
slightly over- or under-confident.
E1

Numerical Results on Galaxy Morphology Classification

We provide the numerical results of few-shot learning from the AstroCLIP galaxy image embeddings on the Galaxy Zoo DECaLS GZD5 survey detailed in subsubsection 4.2.3. We only evaluate galaxy
classes on galaxies for which more than 50% of the volunteers shown
that galaxy answered that question.
This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by the author.

MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2024)

Question

CLIP

DINO

Stein

ZooBot

smooth
disk-edge-on
spiral-arms
bar
bulge-size
how-rounded
edge-on-bulge
spiral-winding
spiral-arm-count
merging

0.83
0.97
0.92
0.56
0.79
0.74
0.82
0.74
0.44
0.80

0.84
0.97
0.95
0.53
0.81
0.79
0.86
0.77
0.50
0.81

0.78
0.87
0.95
0.53
0.78
0.81
0.83
0.79
0.50
0.81

0.94
0.99
0.93
0.82
0.84
0.93
0.91
0.78
0.77
0.88

(b) F1 Scores
Question

CLIP

DINO

Stein

ZooBot

smooth
disk-edge-on
spiral-arms
bar
bulge-size
how-rounded
edge-on-bulge
spiral-winding
spiral-arm-count
merging

0.83
0.97
0.94
0.54
0.78
0.74
0.81
0.68
0.41
0.73

0.83
0.97
0.96
0.37
0.81
0.79
0.84
0.73
0.47
0.71

0.68
0.81
0.95
0.37
0.77
0.81
0.75
0.76
0.44
0.71

0.94
0.99
0.94
0.81
0.84
0.93
0.90
0.79
0.76
0.85

AstroCLIP

(a) Example Image Input

19

(b) Example Spectrum Input

Figure D3. Galaxy property posterior estimates for a randomly chosen galaxy image and spectrum using normalizing flows. The posterior is estimated using a
normalizing flow to map a multivariate Gaussian 𝜋 = N (0, I5 ) into the property vector 𝜃 ∈ R5 using learned bĳective quadratic splines conditioned on the
latent embedding vector zsp . The flow is then sampled by transforming samples from 𝜋 to 𝜃 using the learned bĳective transforms. The true value for each
galaxy property is marked with a line in blue.

MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2024)

20

Liam Parker

(a) AstroCLIP Image Embedding

(b) ResNet18 Image Embedding

(c) DINO Image Embedding

(d) Stein et al. (2021b) Image Embedding

(e) Photometry MLP
Figure E1. Tests of Accuracy with Random Points (TARP; Lemos et al. 2023) Expected Coverage Probability (ECP) tests on the trained normalizing flow
ensembles for each image embedding/supervised method. If the ECP follows the diagonal line, i.e. it is equal to the confidence level for every 𝛼 ∈ [0, 1], then
the estimator is well calibrated. Overall, the various methods appear to be well-calibrated, other than DINO and (Stein et al. 2021b) which are slightly biased on
log 𝑠𝑆𝐹 𝑅, and the photometry which is underconfident on log 𝑠𝑆𝐹 𝑅.

MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2024)

AstroCLIP

21

(a) AstroCLIP Spectrum Embedding

(b) Spectrum Transformer Embedding

(c) Spender
Figure E2. Tests of Accuracy with Random Points (TARP; Lemos et al. 2023) Expected Coverage Probability (ECP) tests on the trained normalizing flow
ensembles for each spectrum embedding/supervised method. If the ECP follows the diagonal line, i.e. it is equal to the confidence level for every 𝛼 ∈ [0, 1],
then the estimator is well calibrated. Overall, the various methods appear to be well-calibrated, other than CLIP and the Spectrum Transformer on log𝑠𝑆𝐹 𝑅m
on which they are slightly biased.

MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2024)

