MNRAS 000, 1–19 (2018)

Preprint 5 December 2019

Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style file v3.0

SuperNNova: an open-source framework for Bayesian,
Neural Network based supernova classification
A. Möller,1,2,3? T. de Boissière4 †
1 Research School of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 2611, Australia
2 ARC Centre of Excellence for All-sky Astrophysics (CAASTRO)
3 Université Clermont Auvergne, CNRS/IN2P3, LPC, F-63000 Clermont-Ferrand, France

arXiv:1901.06384v3 [astro-ph.IM] 3 Dec 2019

4 Lyrebird AI, Unit 302, 55 Mont-Royal Avenue Ouest, Montreal, QC H2T 2S5, Canada.

Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ

ABSTRACT

We introduce SuperNNova, an open source supernova photometric classification framework which leverages recent advances in deep neural networks. Our core algorithm is
a recurrent neural network (RNN) that is trained to classify light-curves using photometric information only. Additional information such as host-galaxy redshift can be
incorporated to improve performance. We evaluate our framework using realistic supernovae simulations that include survey detection. We show that our method, for the
type Ia vs. non Ia supernovae classification problem, reaches accuracies greater than
96.92 ± 0.09 without any redshift information and up to 99.55 ± 0.06 when redshift,
either photometric or spectroscopic, is available. Further, we show that our method attains unprecedented performance for classification of incomplete light-curves, reaching
accuracies > 86.4 ± 0.1 (> 93.5 ± 0.8) without host-galaxy redshift (with redshift information) two days before maximum light. In contrast with previous methods, there is
no need for time-consuming feature engineering and we show that our method scales to
very large datasets with a modest computing budget. In addition, we investigate often
neglected pitfalls of machine learning algorithms. We show that commonly used algorithms suffer from poor calibration and overconfidence on out-of-distribution samples
when applied to supernovae data. We devise extensive tests to estimate the robustness
of classifiers and cast the learning procedure under a Bayesian light, demonstrating a
much better handling of uncertainties. We study the benefits of Bayesian RNNs for
SN Ia cosmology. Our code is open-sourced and available in github ‡.
Key words: methods:data analysis – methods:observational – supernovae:general
–cosmology:observational

1

INTRODUCTION

To study the expansion of the Universe, increasingly large
samples of Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) are used to measure luminosity distances as a function of redshift. Traditionally, SNe Ia are classified after spectroscopic follow-up
of promising supernova candidates identified by photometric
surveys. Previous and current surveys such as SNLS, SDSS,
the Foundation Supernova Survey and Dark Energy Survey
have discovered thousands of supernovae (Astier et al. 2006;
Frieman et al. 2008; Foley et al. 2018; Bernstein et al. 2012).
Of those supernovae, only a small number can be spectroscopically followed-up. The upcoming Large Synoptic Sur-

?

anais.moller@clermont.in2p3.fr
† Equal contribution
‡ https://github.com/supernnova/SuperNNova

© 2018 The Authors

vey Telescope (LSST) survey is expected to discover 107
supernovae (LSST Science Collaboration et al. 2009). This
survey, together with others such as the Zwicky Transient
Survey (ZTF), will explore transient events and expect to
have up to a million transient alerts per night (Bellm 2018).
The scarcity of spectroscopic resources is, and will continue
to be, a limiting factor for supernovae cosmology and timedomain astronomy. Thus, in order to fully take advantage of
the available data, fast and accurate photometric classification is crucial.
In recent years different methods have been developed
to classify supernovae using their light-curves, i.e. their
observed brightness evolution over time in different color
bands. This is a challenging problem since brightness measurements are often noisy and non-uniform in time. Most
classification methods rely either on light-curve template
matching (Poznanski et al. 2007; Sako et al. 2011) or classi-

2

Möller & de Boissière

fication using features extracted from template or functional
fits. Extracted features can be used to classify supernovae using sequential cuts (Bazin et al. 2011; Campbell et al. 2013)
or machine learning algorithms (Kessler et al. 2010b; Möller
et al. 2016; Lochner et al. 2016; Dai et al. 2018). Recent
advances in Deep Learning, a branch of machine learning,
have shown that neural network classifiers trained on raw
data can outperform classifiers based on handcrafted features (Charnock & Moss 2017; Kimura et al. 2017; Moss
2018). In this work, we explore this promising direction and
obtain state-of-the-art results on a variety of supernovae
classification tasks.
Typically, the performance of classification algorithms is
assessed on simulated data. In particular, many algorithms
have used the “Supernova Photometric Classification Challenge” (SPCC) (Kessler et al. 2010a) dataset for training and
evaluation. Some of these methods have also been successfully applied to real survey data, such as SDSS (Sako et al.
2011) and SNLS (Kuznetsova & Connolly 2007; Poznanski
et al. 2007; Bazin et al. 2011; Möller et al. 2016). Recently, in
preparation for LSST, an open data challenge called “Photometric LSST Astronomical Time Series Classification Challenge (PLAsTiCC)” (The PLAsTiCC team et al. 2018) was
launched in an effort to better classify simulated astronomical time-series data.
Existing classification algorithms have been shown to
obtain high-purity SN Ia samples with complete light-curve
information. However, only a handful are able to classify
SNe within a limited number of photometric epochs (Poznanski et al. 2007; Sako et al. 2011; Ishida, E. E. O. and de
Souza, R. S. 2013; Charnock & Moss 2017; Kimura et al.
2017). Partial light-curve classification is key to prioritizing
spectroscopic and photometric resources for promising candidates.
Photometrically classified supernovae can be used in
statistical analyses such as rates and SN Ia cosmology
(González-Gaitán et al. 2011; Campbell et al. 2013; Jones
et al. 2018) but those analyses suffer from bias induced by
contamination from other SN types. For type Ia SN cosmology, this bias has been accounted for using Bayesian frameworks (Hlozek et al. 2012; Jones et al. 2018; Hinton et al.
2018) but little attention has been devoted to the calibration
of the underlying machine learning classifiers. This should
be an important concern given that prior work has demonstrated that miscalibration was a common issue in machine
learning (Niculescu-Mizil & Caruana 2005; Guo et al. 2017).
Another pitfall is that commonly used algorithms give no
information about the uncertainty of their predictions. Recent advances in Bayesian Neural Networks (Gal & Ghahramani 2015b,a; Fortunato et al. 2017) provide a framework
for training neural networks that are able to estimate model
uncertainty in a computationally efficient way.
Model uncertainties can provide valuable information
on the completeness of the training set. It has been shown
that the data samples commonly used to train supernovae
classifiers are far from complete (Lochner et al. 2016; Ishida
et al. 2018). These samples are further biased by the fact
that they only contain known supernova types which match
specific templates. New classes of transients may be found in
the survey sample and existing classification algorithms will
still try to assign it to one of the known classes or targets.
Such events, so called out-of distribution events can con-

taminate a photometrically selected sample. To avoid this,
some analyses advocated for pre-selection cuts (Kuznetsova
& Connolly 2007; Möller et al. 2016) to restrict candidates to
a subset of known classes. However, this prevents the analysis of new cosmological objects, a task which will be a major
focus of brokers such as ANTARES (Narayan et al. 2018).
In this work, we present SuperNNova, an open source
algorithm that fits the requirements highlighted above and
alleviates some of the concerns linked to the use of machine
learning. SuperNNova is based on raw, photometric timeseries inputs. Thus, it is not biased by template matching
nor limited by costly feature engineering.
SuperNNova is the first SN light-curve classification
framework that uses Bayesian Neural Networks. For the
first time in astronomical analyses, two Variational Inference methods (Gal & Ghahramani 2015a; Fortunato et al.
2017) are available in the same framework and compared
using SNe simulations. Furthermore, we are able to handle
irregular time-series without the use of data augmentation
nor fitting methods. This is crucial for telescope observations which are subject to weather condition changes and
non-uniform scheduling.
With SuperNNova, we obtain state-of-the-art results on
the classification of supernovae with complete and partial
light-curve data. We show that SuperNNova’s performance
increases with the amount of data and show that it readily
scales to very large datasets. The performance is further enhanced with additional information such as host-galaxy redshifts. Crucially, we show that SuperNNova’s classifiers can
be trained in a principled, Bayesian way and yield calibrated
predictions with sensible uncertainty estimates. Those uncertainty estimates make SuperNNova better suited to the
task of identifying out-of-distribution candidates as we show
it is not susceptible to classifying those samples with high
confidence.
Although this method has been designed with supernova cosmology in mind, SuperNNova can also be applied
to any light-curve classification task in time-domain astronomy.
This manuscript is structured as follows: we will introduce the simulations, metrics and machine learning algorithms used in Section 2. Then we will present and study
the performance of the three main algorithms available in
SuperNNova: a Baseline RNN (Section 3) and two Bayesian
RNNs (Section 4). In Section 6 we briefly outline the computational resources required to use SuperNNova. In Section 5, we devise extensive tests to evaluate the statistical
robustness of our classifiers and analyze the effect of a photometrically classified type Ia SN sample in cosmology.

2
2.1

METHODS
Simulations and available datasets

We simulated realistic supernovae light-curves using the
SNANA package (Kessler et al. 2009). Our data is similar to
the SPCC data (Kessler et al. 2010a; Kessler et al. 2010b)
with updated models used in the DES simulations (Kessler
et al. 2018). DES light-curves are built from supernova templates and use SALT2 SN Ia SED models (Guy et al. 2007)
and the trained model from JLA (Betoule et al. 2014). ObMNRAS 000, 1–19 (2018)

SuperNNova: SN Bayesian photometric classification
Table 1. Simulated supernovae samples divided by subtypes. We
show the number of supernovae light-curves available per type in
the complete dataset and the number that have a succesful SALT2
fit. Each SN type represents a template with the exception of type
IIL for which we use two different templates.
Simulated supernovae
SN type
Ia
Ib
Ic
IIP
IIn
IIL

SALT2 fitted

complete dataset

402,786
140,197
70,811
94,994
3,249
93,535

912,691
181,454
90,485
296,523
154,614
189,615

IILs by template
IIL1
IIL2

26,717
66,818

DOI:10.5281/zenodo.3265189

MNRAS 000, 1–19 (2018)

Evaluation metrics

ROC curve
AUC is a robust metric, commonly used as an evaluation
method for binary classification. AUC stands for Area Under Curve, where the curve is the ROC curve (Receiver Operating Characteristic). The ROC curve gives an indication
of the performance of a binary classifier by plotting the true
positive rate (efficiency) against the false positive rate (contamination). While the ROC curve represents the performance of a model in two-dimensions, the AUC simplifies
this into a number. A perfect model would score an AUC of
1 while a random classifier would score 0.5.
Accuracy, Purity and Contamination

100,827
88,788

serving logs specifying the simulated cadence and conditions
were included when available.
Our simulation, which is publically available 1 , contains
1, 983, 213 supernovae light-curves of which 881, 969 are successfully fitted using SALT2 to obtain features such as color
and stretch. SALT2 fits do not always converge and therefore some light-curves can not be fitted. Furthermore, we
require loose cuts for fitting, such as: an observation with
S/N > 5, and at least 1 epoch before −2 days, at least 1
epoch past +30 days (rest-frame). The simulation includes
spectroscopic and photometric host galaxy redshifts (Kessler
et al. 2010a; Gupta et al. 2016). To reflect real survey conditions, spectroscopic redshift is obtained only for a subset
of light-curves.
In all the classification tasks that follow, we sub-sample
the dataset to make sure classes are balanced. For binary
classification i.e. the discrimination of SNe Ia vs. others,
we obtain a balanced sample of 912, 691 light-curves (resp.
402, 786 with SALT2 fits). Detailed statistics for binary classification are shown in Table 1. Our simulation count is more
than an order of magnitude larger than SPCC which contained 21, 319 light-curves. We split the data as follows: 80%
training, 10% validation and 10% testing.
In the following we report our results separately for the
“complete” and the “SALT2 fitted” datasets. The former contains all our simulated light-curves after class-balancing. The
latter contains only light-curves that were successfully fitted
with SALT2 (Guy et al. 2007). Since past and current supernova surveys have been focused on discovering type Ia supernovae, this “SALT2 fitted” sample is closer to their spectroscopically targeted supernovae. We will call the “SALT2
fitted” dataset a non-representative one, as it fails to explore
the full diversity of supernovae. Our representative set will
be the “complete” dataset. We further explore these samples
and the issue of representativeness in Section 5.2.

1

2.2

3

If classes are balanced, classification accuracy is an intuitive
and useful metric. Accuracy is measured as the number of
correct predictions against the total number of predictions.
For binary classification, accuracy can also be calculated in
terms of positives and negatives as follows:
accuracy =

TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN

(1)

where TP (resp. TN) are true positives (resp. negatives)
and FP (resp. FN) are false positives (resp. negatives). For
binary classification, TP shows the number of correctly classified SNe Ia while TN shows the number of correctly classified core-collapse SNe. In this work, unless specified, the
predicted type corresponds to the highest probability class.
The purity of the SN Ia sample and the classification
efficiency are defined as:
purity =

TP
;
TP + FP

efficiency =

TP
TP + FN

(2)

Contamination by core collapse is defined as:
FP
(3)
FP + TN
In this work, performance metrics reported with errors
represent the mean and one standard deviation of the distribution. This distribution is obtained by performing 5 runs
with different random seeds.

contamination =

2.3

Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)

RNNs are a class of neural nets that allow connections between hidden units with a time delay; they are well-suited
for modeling sequential data or time series data (Bahdanau
et al. 2014; Sutskever et al. 2014; Mehri et al. 2016; Kalchbrenner et al. 2018; Vasquez & Lewis 2019). Through the
connections between hidden units, the model can learn to
retain or discard past information about its inputs, and
in principle discover correlations across time. Popular recent architectures such as Long short-term memory (LSTM)
(Hochreiter & Schmidhuber 1997) or Gated Recurrent Univt
(GRU) (Chung et al. 2014) alleviate some of the issues that
occur when training these models. They introduce a memory
cell and gating mechanisms that endow recurrent networks
with better control of the information flow.
The structure of a basic RNN with 2 hidden layers
is illustrated in Figure 1. The same series of operations

4

Möller & de Boissière
2.4

Figure 1. Partial schema of a vanilla RNN with mean pooling. Layers are indicated in the first left column. Inputs (Xt ) are
given to the network. Arrows indicate transmission of temporal
information. The network extends to the right by the number of
t ∈ [1, T ] available inputs.

(typically an affine matrix multiplication followed by an
activation function) are applied to each element of a sequence (X)t ∈[1,T ] to produce a sequence of hidden states
(ht ). These operations are parameterized by learnt weights
(W, W 0, V, U, U 0 in Figure 1) and biases (b). Multiple recurrent layers can be stacked on top of each other by feeding a layer’s output as input to the next layer. To obtain
the class prediction, the sequential information is eventually condensed to a fixed length representation (for instance
through mean-pooling, i.e averaging of the hidden states).
The use of a softmax function ensures that the network’s
output can be understood as probabilities. In Figure 1, the
RNN is unidirectional: it is allowed to process information
from left to right, bidirectional networks are also allowed
to process from right to left. This has been used in many
applications such as language translation to improve performance.
Traditional RNNs lack the ability to quantify model uncertainty. However, quantifying the uncertainty of a model’s
prediction is a highly desirable feature for cosmological applications. In this work, we leverage two recent advances
in variational inference that have proven effective in helping neural networks to estimate uncertainty. Gal et al. (Gal
& Ghahramani 2015b) show that dropout (a regularization
technique consisting in randomly dropping weights or activations) has a Bayesian interpretation and can be used to
improve performance and calibrate predictions. Fortunato
et al. (Fortunato et al. 2017) optimize a posterior distribution over each of the neural network’s weights and have
shown competitive results and high quality uncertainties on
challenging language modeling and image captioning tasks.
We introduce variational inference and our approximation
methods in Section 4.

RNN architecture

Our PyTorch (Paszke et al. 2017) implementation is publicly
available on GitHub 2 with accompanying documentation.
The core building block of our algorithm is a Recurrent
Neural Network (RNN). Our RNN processes the photometric time series to produce a sequence of hidden states. The
sequence is condensed to fixed length through mean pooling or alternatively by concatenating the last hidden state
of each recurrent layer. In the following, we will call these
RNN output options mean pooling or standard respectively.
Finally, a linear projection layer is applied to obtain an Ndimensional vector, where N is the number of classes. A
softmax function is used to obtain probabilities for an input
to belong to a given class.
We make it easy for the user to experiment with hyperparameters such as layer type, network size, bidirectionality, batch size or gradient descent optimizer through an extensive command line interface. In addition, we implement
two Bayesian training methods. The first one, dubbed “MC
Dropout” implements (Gal & Ghahramani 2015b) and the
second one, which we simply call “BBB” implements (Fortunato et al. 2017) 3 . These two Bayesian methods provide
principled regularization for the training of neural networks,
and have been shown to provide superior uncertainty estimation, a crucial property for astronomy and cosmology
applications.
This framework uses the python libraries: pandas,
numpy, astropy, matplotlib, pytorch, scikit-learn, seaborn
(McKinney 2010; Van Der Walt et al. 2011; The Astropy
Collaboration et al. 2018; Astropy Collaboration et al. 2013;
Hunter 2007; Paszke et al. 2017; Pedregosa et al. 2011;
Waskom et al. 2018).

RNN training data
The only inputs required by our algorithm are photometric time series or light-curves. However, any other information available can and should be used to improve the performance. Thus, we made it straightforward to add additional
inputs, such as host-galaxy redshift by simply repeating the
redshift value and its error for all time-steps in the time series. There is no need for tedious, time-consuming feature
engineering or domain-expert knowledge. This is a decisive
advantage of our method since it has been shown (Lochner
et al. 2016) that the choice of the feature extraction method
can significantly impact classification results.
This data can be used to train RNNs for three distinct
classifications tasks: binary (SNe Ia vs. non Ia), ternary (Ia,
II, Ibc) and seven-way classification (Ia, IIP, IIn, IIL1, IIL2,
Ib and Ic).

RNN training details
The light-curve data is typically formatted in a tabular way,
where each row corresponds to one observation, in one specific filter. We group observations within eight hours of each

2

https://github.com/supernnova/SuperNNova
in the github paper branch these methods are named MC
dropout and Bayesian respectively.
3

MNRAS 000, 1–19 (2018)

SuperNNova: SN Bayesian photometric classification
other on a single row. Which is equivalent to grouping all
the observed fluxes in a given night. If a given filter is not
observed, we assign it a special value to indicate that it is
missing. We add a delta time feature to indicate how much
time has elapsed since the last observation. We also add a
feature indicating which filter is available.
The features used in the algorithm for a given time step
are: fluxes (FLUXCAL in filters g, i, r, z), flux errors (FLUXCALERR in filters g, i, r, z), time step (delta time) and onehot encoding representing available flux information (g, gi,
gir, girz, giz, gr, grz, gz, i, ir, irz, iz, r, rz, z). Additional
information can be provided such as host-galaxy redshift,
spectroscopic or photometric, and its error.
Light-curve fluxes and errors exhibit large variations
which is why we paid special care to input data normalization. Three options are supported: no normalization, individual, “per-filter” normalization and “global” normalization. The latter two are obtained as follows: features (f)
are first log transformed and then scaled. The log transform ( fl ) uses the minimum value of the feature min( f ) and
a constant () to center the distribution in zero as follows:
fl = log (−min( f ) + f + ). Using the mean and standard deviation of the log transform (µ, σ( fl )), standard scaling is
applied: fˆ = ( fl − µ( fl ))/σ( fl ). In the “global” scheme, the
minimum, mean and standard deviation are computed over
all fluxes (resp. all errors). In the “per-filter” scheme, they
are computed for each filter.
We use the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba 2014) to
train our RNNs. Two learning rate policies were implemented: a standard “decay on plateau” policy which decays
the learning rate by a constant factor when the validation
loss stagnates and the 1-cycle policy introduced in (Smith
2018).
Dropout is applied to all our models for regularization
(except in the “BBB” case where regularization is enforced
by a Kullback Leibler divergence term in the loss function).
Owing to the large size of the dataset and limited overfitting
observed, we did not use data augmentation. However, to
improve performance with incomplete light curves, we found
it beneficial to train the network with randomly truncated
light-curves. To make better use of parallelism, we batch
together multiple light-curves at a time, using zero-padding
and masking where appropriate.
2.5

Random Forest (RF)

To compare our Recurrent Neural Networks with other classification methods, we implement an additional classifier.
We use the excellent scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al. 2011) library to implement a random forest classifier, which has
been previously shown to have high performance in supernova photometric classification tasks (Möller et al. 2016;
Lochner et al. 2016; Dai et al. 2018). Features for this classifier are extracted from complete light-curves with the SALT2
fitter (Guy et al. 2007). This method has been shown to
have good performance in binary classification with complete light-curves (Lochner et al. 2016). We emphasize that
the SALT2 fitter requires a redshift as input. Thus, even if
no explicit redshift information is given to the random forest
classifier, the information implicitly percolates through the
SALT2 fit parameters. We retained the following features to
train our random forest classifier: stretch (x1, x1E RR ), color
MNRAS 000, 1–19 (2018)

5

(c, cE RR ), magnitude in B-band (mB, mBE RR ), normalization (x0, x0 E R R ), goodness of fit ( χ2 ), and observed magnitudes in rigz bands (m0obsr , m0obsi , m0obsg , m0obsz and their
errors).
2.6

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)

CNNs are another type of deep learning networks. They
were originally introduced for image processing (Lecun et al.
1998). CNNs are made up of a cascade of convolutional layers which perform sliding cross-correlation of learned weight
kernels with the input data. In astronomy, they have been
successfully applied to various problems including classification and discovery of astrophysical objects (Kimura et al.
2017; Gieseke et al. 2017; Lanusse et al. 2018; Carrasco-Davis
et al. 2018).
For comparison with our RNN architecture introduced
in Section 2.4, we implemented a simple CNN architecture
in PyTorch (Paszke et al. 2017). Our network is made up
of four 1D convolutional layers. Following 2.4, we collapse
the sequence to a fixed length representation and obtain the
final prediction by applying a linear projection layer.

3

BASELINE RNN

We introduce a ”Baseline RNN” which is trained in the standard, non-Bayesian way. In this Section, we demonstrate
the capabilities of this baseline model. We show that it is
able to accurately classify light-curves at each time step as
shown in Figure 2. We study the impact on the performance
when additional information such as host-galaxy redshift is
added, when different training sets are used and when varying the number of classification targets (binomial, ternary
and seven-way classification).
3.1

Hyper-parameters

As shown in Section 2.4, different network architectures can
be easily implemented in SuperNNova. We assess the impact of these variations using two metrics: the complete
light-curve classification accuracy and the AUC for the binary classification task for 0.2 of the SALT2 fitted dataset.
We probed: batch size (64, 128, 512, 1024), optimizer (Adam,
RMSProp), dropout on recurrent layers (0.05, 0.1, 0.2), layer
type (GRU, LSTM), bidirectional (True, False), number of
layers (1, 2), rnn output (standard, mean pooling), random
length (True, False) and the two learning policies. We also
compared two ways to compress the hidden state sequence
before the final prediction: last hidden state concatenation
and mean pooling. These hyper parameters do not have
a strong impact on the performance of the Baseline RNN
(classification accuracy for complete light-curve classification has a mean of 94.48 and a standard deviation of 1%).
We obtain two sets of hyper-parameters with the same accuracy of 96.01 without redshift information. We choose as our
best hyper-parameters: batch size 128, Adam optimizer, 0.05
dropout on recurrent layers, bidirectional LSTM layers, 2 recurrent layers, cyclic learning rate and standard rnn output.
The latter however, is not preferred for partial light-curve
classification which will be explored in Section 3.5. To improve early light-curve classification we choose the option of

6

Möller & de Boissière
3.3

Comparison with other methods

The primary driver of supernova photometric classification
has been to disentangle type Ia from other types of supernovae. We evaluate the performance of our SuperNNova
Baseline RNN on this task and compare it with different
classification algorithms: the Random Forest introduced in
Section 2.5, the Convolutional Neural Network structure in
Section 2.6 and results obtained with another RNN architecture (Charnock & Moss 2017). We use the same training and
validation samples from the SALT2 fitted dataset to evaluate all algorithms. We assess uncertainties in the accuracy
by performing 5 randomized runs that select different training, validation and testing splits. We obtain for this dataset
an accuracy for the Baseline RNN of 96.3 ± 0.4 and an AUC
of 0.995 ± 0.001.

3.3.1
Figure 2. Simulated type Ia supernova light-curve and classification. Top: calibrated flux evolution in different DES band-passes
as a function of normalized time (the first photometric measurement is set to time equals zero). Bottom: Baseline RNN classification probability evolution with respect of time, no host-galaxy
redshift information was provided. At each photometric measurement, classification probability is obtained. Maximum light of the
simulated supernova is shown in a gray dashed line and simulated redshift of the supernovae is shown on the top z = 0.466.
We highlight that redshift is not used for this classification but
can improve results. Our Baseline RNN classifies this light-curve
as type Ia SN with great accuracy before maximum light, it only
requires a handful of photometric epochs.

mean pooling before final prediction and training with randomly truncated light-curves. These settings will be used
throughout the following unless specified.

As we did for our baseline RNN, we first choose the
best hyper-parameters for the CNN. We probed: batch
size (64,128,512), random length (True, False), size of hidden dimension (16, 32, 64) and different learning rates
(0.01,0.001,0.0001). Our best performance is found with:
batch size of 128, hidden dimension 32, learning rate 0.01,
bidirectional layers and training with random length sequences. For this configuration, we find that our CNN architecture obtains an accuracy of 94.53 ± 0.07 and an AUC
0.9887 ± 0.0002 without any redshift information for the
whole SALT2 fitted dataset. Our Baseline RNN obtains
higher accuracies for this classification task. This behaviour
is also seen with a smaller data fraction, 0.2 where classification accuracies are found to be 93.1 ± 0.2 (97.1 ± 0.1,
98.98±0.07) without (with photometric, spectroscopic) hostredshift information. We note that other CNN configurations
may yield better accuracies. Our CNN model is available in
the SuperNNova repository4 in order to foster further experiments on this classification task.

3.3.2
3.2

Normalization

Input feature normalization is common practice to facilitate
the training of neural networks. With half of the SALT2
fitted dataset, we evaluate the impact of different normalization types for fluxes and errors: no normalization, a global
normalization over all filters and a per filter normalization.
We find that the accuracy of our classifier is slightly improved when using global normalization (96.12 ± 0.07) when
compared to no normalization (94.2 ± 0.2). We hypothesize
that our use of optimizers with adaptive learning rate greatly
mitigates feature scale issues. A per filter normalization is
found to have equivalent performance (96.0 ± 0.2) to global
normalization. Such a normalization scheme blurs the color
ratio between observed light-curves in different band-passes.
Interestingly, this indicates that color ratios are not deemed
an important feature for our algorithm’s accurate classification of this supernova sample. An in depth study of normalization impact is out of the scope of this paper. Unless
specified otherwise, we choose to apply global normalization
throughout the rest of this work.

Baseline RNN vs. CNN

Baseline RNN vs. RF

The RF classifier obtains accuracies of 95.15 ± 0.07 and an
AUC of 0.9929 ± 0.0003 without redshift information. Our
Baseline RNN has a higher accuracy and AUC than many
RF methods found in the literature (Möller et al. 2016;
Lochner et al. 2016; Dai et al. 2018). However, classification
accuracies depend on both the size and content of training and testing sets and therefore cannot be directly compared. We study the effect of the size of the training sample on the accuracy. As shown in Figure 3, we find that
our Baseline RNN outperforms the Random Forest for large
dataset sizes given the same redshift information. We also
find that RNNs exhibit an increase in performance with
larger datasets while the Random Forest classifiers remains
almost constant. Again, we stress that even when no explicit redshift information is provided to the Random Forest
classifier, the features obtained with the SALT2 fit implicitly contain this information. The high-accuracy of our RNN

4

https://github.com/supernnova/SuperNNova
MNRAS 000, 1–19 (2018)

SuperNNova: SN Bayesian photometric classification

7

shows that it has successfully learned meaningful representations on top of raw photometric time-series, rather than
using handcrafted features extracted from light-curve fitting.
By using photometry directly we avoid biasing our classified
sample, a particularly relevant observation since the choice
of feature extraction has a strong impact on performance
(Lochner et al. 2016).
3.3.3

Baseline RNN vs. another RNN architecture

For reference purposes, we compare a recently introduced
RNN-based SN classifier with our Baseline RNN trained
with a similar size set. Charnock & Moss (2017) uses half
of the PCC dataset 5 times data-augmented, equivalent to
≈ 50, 000 supernovae light-curves, and obtains an accuracy
of 93.1 on binary classification without redshift information
and 94.8 with redshift. By selecting a data fraction of 0.05
of our dataset, we can train our baseline RNN with 32, 222
light-curves and obtain a classification accuracy of 92.4 ± 0.9
and an AUC of 0.980 ± 0.004 without redshift information,
when using photometric redshifts we obtain an accuracy of
96.8 ± 0.1. Although both methods were trained with different samples, our accuracies are comparable. Our algorithm
seems to be more sensitive to redshift information providing
up to 4% accuracy increase for this sample size.
3.4

Redshift, contamination and efficiency

The addition of photometric redshifts, which are available
for all our simulated supernovae, increases the accuracy of
our baseline RNN by 2% for photometric and 3% for spectroscopic redshifts. Since spectroscopic redshifts are available
for a subset of supernovae, we only evaluate performance on
light-curves for which this redshift is available. We will continue using this subsample performance throughout the rest
of this manuscript.
A photometrically classified type Ia supernova sample is
expected to have a small percentage of contamination from
other supernova types. As mentioned in Section 2.1, our simulations are realistic and therefore include known SN rates
and detection efficiencies for a survey such as DES. Therefore, our estimates are a good indicator of the expected contamination by core-collapse SNe in a photometrically classified SN Ia sample.
We find that the contamination (or False Positive Rate)
is dominated by types Ib and Ic supernovae when classifying without redshift information. This contamination peaks
at simulated redshift between 0.2 for Ic and 0.4 for Ib and
for our Baseline RNN is in the order of a couple percent for
Ib and Ic SNe and under 1% for other types. Contamination levels are found to be not correlated with the number
of light-curves for training. Within this 1% contamination
there are type IIL and IIP SNe which are more numerous
than type Ic in our simulations but are mostly correctly
classified by SuperNNova. Host-galaxy redshifts increase the
performance of our classifier reducing contamination. In particular simulated supernovae from Ib, and Ic templates are
better classified, reducing their contamination contribution
in our Baseline RNN from 2.5 ± 0.2 and 1.3 ± 0.1 respectively
to < 0.1% with host redshifts. Interestingly, classification of
other core-collapse SNe such as IIP, IIn and IIL1 is barely
affected by this additional information.
MNRAS 000, 1–19 (2018)

Figure 3. Ia vs. non-Ia classification accuracy with respect to
training set size using the SALT2 fitted dataset. Top axis indicates the used data fraction and the bottom axis number of supernovae. Accuracy of baseline RNN is shown in indigo squares,
CNN in grey diamonds and Random Forest in orange circles. Error bars are one standard deviation from the accuracy distribution
for five runs with different random seeds to initialize the networks
weights. Classification using: no host-galaxy redshifts are empty,
photometric host-galaxy redshifts bottom filled and spectroscopic
host redshifts fully filled. Our Baseline RNN achieves greater accuracies than the other classifiers for the same dataset and explicit
redshift information.

Selection efficiency is an important metric when classifying type Ia supernovae. For spectroscopically selected
samples, selection efficiencies drop quickly for faint events
(Kessler et al. 2018; D’Andrea et al. 2018). Our Baseline
RNN performs superbly, with almost constant efficiency as
a function of simulated redshift with an average efficiency of
97.3 ± 0.4 without and up to 99.61 ± 0.09 with host-galaxy
redshift information. Such high efficiencies enable probing
new supernovae populations at high-redshift and can have
an important effect on selection biases found currently in
cosmology as will be discussed in Section 5.
Furthermore, one of the biggest limitation of photometrically classified samples is the expected contamination level
by other supernova types which may affect statistical analyses (Hlozek et al. 2012; Jones et al. 2018). It has also been
shown that for photometrically classified SNe Ia there is a
compromise between sample purity and the efficiency of the
classifier (Möller et al. 2016; Dai et al. 2018). We find that
our highly efficient algorithm does not compromises the purity of the sample. On the contrary, the purity of a SN Ia
sample classified without redshift is 95.4 ± 0.5, while the addition of redshifts increases the sample purity to 99.49±0.05.
This level of contamination, less than 1%, is within the current range of contamination of spectroscopically classified
samples currently used in cosmological and astrophysical
analyses (Rubin et al. 2015).

3.5

Early light-curve classification

Having demonstrated the high performance of our baseline
RNN in comparison to other classification methods, we now

8

Möller & de Boissière

Figure 4. Average number of photometric epochs (nights) used
for early light-curve classification. Rows indicate two ways of computing the average number of photometric nights available for
classification while columns indicate the days around simulated
peak brightness of the supernova (-2,-1, at peak, +1,+2). The
raw average of photometric epochs is shown in the row ”unique
nights”, since our simulated light-curves can include observations
before the supernova explosion, a more realistic estimation of the
useful epochs include only observations two weeks before observed
peak brightness which is a loose estimate of the pre-maximum
phase of a type Ia supernova light-curve, this estimation is shown
in the row ”unique nights (realistic)”. Colors indicate the accuracy obtained for these classifications with the Baseline RNN as
shown in Table 2 for the complete dataset without any redshift
information.

turn to explore other capabilities of SuperNNova. To do
so, we use the complete dataset which contains light-curves
that are not successfully fitted with SALT2. This increases
the number and diversity of the training set for both corecollapse and type Ia supernovae. The effect of the SN diversity on the classifier performance is further studied in
Section 5.2.
While there are currently a wealth of algorithms that
can classify complete light-curves, only a handful are able to
classify partial light-curves. Our RNN architecture allows us
to accurately classify supernovae with a limited number of
photometric epochs. At each light-curve time step, as more
information is added, the RNN hidden state is updated, allowing the network to adapt its predictions.
In Table 2 we present our baseline RNN accuracies for
partial light-curve classification for the whole SALT2 fitted
and complete datasets. The number of photometric epochs
(nights) available at different stages of the light-curves are
shown in Figure 4. In average, we require only ≈ 5 observing nights to obtain classification accuracies > 80%. Since
simulated light-curves can contain photometric nights before the actual supernova explosion, we provide a ”realistic”
estimate for unique nights useful in the classification. For
this estimate, we select only photometric epochs within 14
days before peak maximum which is a loose threshold for the
rising time of type Ia supernovae. Using this more realistic
metric, we require between 2.4±1.2 and 3.3±1.4 photometric
epochs in average to start accurately classifying supernovae.
We note that this low number of required epochs is linked
to multi-color observations in each night which provide valuable information for classification.
Additionally, since training set numbers affect performance metrics, we compare the performance with 43% of

the complete dataset. This fraction of the complete dataset
has a similar size training set than the SALT2 fitted one.
For all datasets, our baseline RNN is capable of attaining a high-accuracy classification, > 83% right before the
maximum of a supernova light-curve. Further, we show that
the addition of host-galaxy redshifts produce a rise in accuracy as high as 12 points.
We note that for spectroscopic redshifts, the complete
sample has lower accuracy when compared with the use of
photometric redshifts. This was not observed in the SALT2
fitted sample and it may be explained by a selection bias
in the complete dataset for supernovae with spectroscopic
redshifts.
When classifying type Ia supernovae before or around
maximum light, we find that contamination is still dominated by Ib supernovae with 9.4 ± 0.3% contribution and
Ic with 3.3 ± 0.2%. Interestingly, type IIP and IIL2 supernovae can contribute around 2% of the contamination each,
while this is rarely the case for complete light curve classification. This may be due to characteristic features of these
light-curves only present after maximum light, such as the
plateau exhibited by type IIp SNe.
In summary, we have shown that SuperNNova is able
to accurately classify light-curves before and at maximum
light. With accuracies ranging from 83.6±0.6 up to 97.0±0.2
for the salt fitted dataset, without and with redshifts respectively. SuperNNova opens a path towards efficient use of
photometric and spectroscopic resources for follow-up. Candidates can then be prioritized for diverse science goals including targeted samples (e.g. SNe Ia for cosmology) and
improving the SN sample for photometric classification as
recently proposed by Ishida et al. (2018). Such a functionality will be crucial in the upcoming surveys where each night
thousands of transients may be discovered.
3.6

Classifying many supernovae types

There is more to supernovae classification than binary classification. Time-domain surveys are increasingly exploring
the diversity of supernovae and would benefit from classification of multiple supernova classes. We explore ternary (Ia,
Ibc and IIs) and seven-way (Ia, IIP, IIn, IIL1, IIL2, Ib, Ic)
classification tasks. We train with the complete dataset to
obtain a large number of light-curves per target.
For ternary classification, we train with 318, 820 lightcurves per type and for the seven-way classification with
104, 158 per type. Accuracies for these classifications with
and without redshifts are shown in Table 3. For complete
light-curves our method yields unprecedented classification
accuracy, providing a useful tool for obtaining photometric
samples of a diversity of supernovae. Early classification becomes a much more challenging tasks and we consequently
observe a notable performance degradation. Nonetheless,
our algorithm provides a reasonable indication of the possible supernova type and performance is enhanced with the
incorporation of redshift information.
For an equivalent training sample per type, the ternary
or seven-way classification accuracy with or without redshift
and whole light-curves is much lower than for binary classification (Ia vs. non Ia) as shown in Figure 3. Splitting the
core-collapse supernovae in subclasses adds a new level of
complexity which accounts for the performance drop. InterMNRAS 000, 1–19 (2018)

SuperNNova: SN Bayesian photometric classification

9

Table 2. Ia vs. non-Ia classification accuracy using baseline RNN
trained with whole SALT2 fitted dataset, a fraction of 0.43 and
the whole complete dataset. Accuracy for partial light-curve classification with respect of days before or after simulated supernova
peak, all indicates all data points available for each light-curve.
The addition of host redshift features is indicated as photometric
(zpho) or spectroscopic (zspe). For the latter, since not all supernovae have a spectroscopic redshift, we show the accuracy of the
subsample with spectroscopic host redshift.
SALT2 fitted dataset
redshift

-2

0

+2

all

None
zpho
zspe

83.6 ± 0.6
93.2 ± 0.4
97.0 ± 0.2

85.0 ± 0.7
93.8 ± 0.5
97.4 ± 0.2

86.4 ± 0.7
94.5 ± 0.5
97.9 ± 0.2

96.3 ± 0.4
98.4 ± 0.3
99.55 ± 0.06

43% of complete dataset
redshift

-2

0

+2

all

None
zpho
zspe

86.1 ± 0.1
93.0 ± 0.3
92.7 ± 0.4

87.24 ± 0.08
93.7 ± 0.3
93.4 ± 0.4

88.31 ± 0.09
94.3 ± 0.3
94.0 ± 0.5

96.65 ± 0.05
98.6 ± 0.2
98.1 ± 0.2

Complete dataset
redshift

-2

0

+2

all

None
zpho
zspe

86.4 ± 0.1
93.5 ± 0.1
93.3 ± 0.1

87.6 ± 0.1
94.2 ± 0.1
94.0 ± 0.1

88.6 ± 0.1
94.8 ± 0.1
94.6 ± 0.1

96.92 ± 0.09
98.85 ± 0.04
98.43 ± 0.08

estingly, for seven-way classification the contamination of
the SN Ia sample is dominated by type IIP SN as seen in
Figure 5. This was seen for early classification in previous
Section 3.5 but not for the complete light-curve classification.
As seen in Table 3, early classification is severely impacted by adding more classification targets. A thorough
study on mechanisms to improve multiclass predictions is
out of the scope of this paper but an interesting avenue
for further studies. It is possible that a two-step procedure
is useful, where: first a multi-target prediction would identify the most probable targets and then, a second prediction with an algorithm specifically trained on the top candidates would refine the classification. The extensive results
presented here show that SuperNNova can be a valuable
tool for present and future surveys that wish to prioritize
spectroscopic and photometric follow-up targets.

4

Table 3. Ternary (Ia, Ibc, IIs) and seven-way (Ia, IIP, IIn, IIL1,
IIL2, Ib, Ic) classification using baseline RNN trained with complete dataset. Accuracy for partial light-curve classification with
respect of days before or after simulated supernova peak. The addition of host redshift features is indicated as photometric (zpho)
or spectroscopic (zspe). We evaluate the accuracy for the complete validation sample and for the subset of light-curves that
possess a spectroscopic host-galaxy redshift.
Ternary classification
redshift

-2

0

+2

all

None
zpho
zspe

69.2 ± 0.2
79.7 ± 0.1
77.8 ± 1.1

71.6 ± 0.3
81.5 ± 0.2
79.6 ± 1.2

74.1 ± 0.3
83.4 ± 0.2
81.5 ± 1.3

92.4 ± 0.3
95.4 ± 0.1
94.1 ± 1.0

Seven-way classification

BAYESIAN RNNS (BRNNS)

In this Section we introduce Bayesian Recurrent Neural
Networks. These RNNs fit a posterior distribution on the
weights of the neural network thus allowing us to sample
different predictions for a given input. Both of our BRNNs
are derived from a technique called Variational Inference
which we will now quickly review.
4.1

Figure 5. Confusion Matrix for seven-way classification with best
performing Baseline classifier with no redshift information. Matrix shows the fraction of light-curves for a given supernova type
(True label) classified as the supernova type in the horizontal axis
(Predicted label). The diagonal elements are those light-curves
correctly classified while off-diagonal elements are those that are
mislabeled by the classifier. Color bar indicates the normalized
percentage of a certain type of SN light-curves in the predicted label. For seven-way classification our algorithm performs superbly
for types Ib, IIL1 and IIn SNe while SNe Ia are not as well characterized.

Variational Inference

Following (Blundell et al. 2015), we can view neural networks as a model aiming to correctly estimate P (y|x, w)
where in our case, P is a categorical distribution, y is the
MNRAS 000, 1–19 (2018)

redshift

-2

0

+2

all

None
zpho
zspe

57.2 ± 0.3
64.5 ± 0.2
64.2 ± 0.3

60.0 ± 0.4
67.1 ± 0.2
67.0 ± 0.4

62.9 ± 0.3
69.8 ± 0.2
69.8 ± 0.4

86.8 ± 0.3
90.0 ± 0.1
90.4 ± 0.4

classification target, x is the photometric light-curve and w
are the network’s weights. Neural networks are traditionally
trained using a maximum likelihood criterion: given a set of
N labeled training observations, the dataset D is defined by
D = (xi, yi )i=1...N , we minimize the negative log likelihood
ÍN
N LL = min i=1
− log P(yi |xi, w) with gradient descent.
w

10

Möller & de Boissière

Moving on to the Bayesian picture, instead of having a
fixed value for each weight in the neural network, we now
assign a distribution to each weight. We seek to find the posterior distribution of the weights: P (w|D) which will then
allow us ∫to make predictions for new, new observations x:
P(ŷ|x) = P(ŷ|x, w)P (w|D) dw. Typically, the posterior distribution is intractable for deep neural networks. To sidestep
this difficulty, we can approximate the posterior with a simple parametric distribution q(w|θ) called the variational distribution. In the gaussian case, θ = (µ, σ), respectively the
mean and standard deviation of this variational distribution. Variational inference introduces a new learning criterion, where one seeks to minimize a divergence (typically,
the Kullback-Leibler divergence or KL) between the posterior distribution and its variational approximation:
θ̂ = min KL (q(w|θ)||P(w|D))
θ


∫
= min KL (q(w|θ)||P(w)) −
q(w|θ) log P(D|w)dw
θ


= min KL (q(w|θ)||P(w)) − Eq(w|θ) (log P(D|w))
θ

(4)
(5)

4.3

(6)

Following Fortunato et al. (2017), to model the variational
distribution q(w|θ) we use a simple Gaussian distribution
with mean µ and standard deviation σ.
During training, we sample each weight w as follows:
sample ε ∼ N (0, 1) then obtain w = µ + σ × ε. Where σ, µ are
optimized by gradient descent.
Following Blundell et al. (2015), we partition the training data in nB minibatches D = (D j ) j=1...n B . For each batch,
we optimize:

where P(w) is a user-specified prior distribution over the
neural network’s weights. This new cost function is made up
of two terms. The first one, the KL term, is a regularization
term: it penalizes variational distributions which differ too
much from the prior. The second one is a likelihood term;
our model must be flexible enough to handle the complexity of the data distribution. Bayesian optimization of neural
networks is a trade-off between those two terms.
We will now review two ways in which the variational
distribution can be specified and investigate their applications to supernova cosmology. Results in the following sections use the complete dataset for training, validation and
testing.

4.2

values, p ∈ [0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2] and weight decay of the gradient descent optimiser ∈ [1e−5, 1e−7, 1e−9 ] to evaluate the
performance of the network with a data fraction of 0.2. We
find that the two most accurate architectures have a dropout
of 0.01 and a weight decay of 1e−5 and 1e−7 . Since accuracies for both models differ by less than 0.1%, we choose to
use weight decay 1e−7 in the following. For the complete
dataset this configuration has an accuracy of 96.87 ± 0.09
without redshift and 98.8 ± 0.1 with host photometric redshift for complete light-curve classification which is equivalent to the baseline RNN accuracy with a slight reduction.
We find that the efficiency (98.91 ± 0.05), purity (98.6 ± 0.2)
and contamination values are similar but slightly less than
to those of the Baseline implementation. In the next Section 5, we will discuss other criteria for selecting the best
performing method, through calibration and entropy of Outof-Distribution events.

Lj =

Bayes by Backprop (BBB)

1
KL (q(w|θ)||P(w)) − Eq(w|θ) (log P(D j |w))
nB

(7)

where the KL-divergence is estimated with Monte Carlo
sampling and the prior is given by a mixture of Gaussians with standard deviation σ1, σ2 respectively as:
Í B
P(w) = πN (0, σ1 ) + (1 − π)N (0, σ2 ). nj=1
L j is equivalent to
the loss in Eq. 6.

MC dropout

Following (Gal & Ghahramani 2015b,a) we define our variational distribution to factorize over each row ∇ of the network’s weight matrices: q(wr ) = pN (0, σ 2 I)+(1−d)N (µr , σ 2 I)
where wr is the weight matrices rows, d is the dropout probability, N the normal distribution, µr is the variational parameter (row vector) optimised with our gradient descent
algorithm, σ 2 is a fixed, small constant and I the identity.
Using a normal prior on the weights, the KL term can be
approximated as L2 regularization on the network’s weights.
Evaluating this network then becomes equivalent to performing dropout (i.e. masking with zeros) on the rows of
the weight matrices (or equivalently, on each layer’s input).
The network can then be trained as usual, as long as we use
the same dropout mask at every time step in the sequence
(Gal & Ghahramani 2015b,a).
We can now obtain a distribution of predictions, simply
by sampling a different dropout mask for each prediction.
In this work we sample predictions fifty times for each lightcurve. The median of the prediction array is used to report
the accuracy score. These uncertainties can provide valuable
information in the classifier’s confidence on the prediction.
We use the same hyper-parameters as those of the baseline RNN presented in Section 3. We probe different dropout

Using the same hyper-parameters as those of the baseline RNN presented in Section 3, we study the impact of
modifying the prior with 0.2 of the SALT2 fitted dataset. We
set π = 0.75. We searched log σ1 ∈ {−2, −1}, log σ2 ∈ {−4, −7}
for the recurrent layer and log σ1 ∈ {−2, −1, −0.5}, log σ2 ∈
{−1, −0.5, −0.1} for the output layer. We initialized the standard deviation of the weights
layer

 by sam
 of the recurrent
σmix

σmix

pling uniformly between log e ρlower − 1 and log e ρupper − 1 ,
q
where σmix = πσ12 + (1 − π)σ22 , ρlower ∈ {4, 3} and ρlower ∈
{2, 1} for the recurrent layer and ρlower ∈ {3, 2, 1} and ρlower ∈
{2, 1} for the output layer.
We find that the Bayesian network trains and attains
better performance without the cyclic learning rate.
The most accurate model has a log σ1 = −1, log σ2 = −7,
ρlower = 4 and ρupper = 3 for the recurrent layer and log σ1 =
−0.5, log σ2 = −0.1, ρlower = 3.0 and ρupper = 2.0 for the output layer. This model reaches an accuracy of 96.85 ± 0.05
without redshift and 98.72 ± 0.04 with host photometric redshift information for whole light-curve classification in the
complete dataset. The efficiency, purity and contamination
values are similar to those of the MC dropout implementation and slightly reduced with respect to the Baseline imMNRAS 000, 1–19 (2018)

SuperNNova: SN Bayesian photometric classification
plementation ≤ 0.5%. In Section 5, we will discuss other
criteria for selecting the best performing method, through
calibration, entropy of Out-of-Distribution events and model
uncertainties.

4.4

BRNNs Uncertainties

ns

©Õ
ª
b
σ = std ­
p j (xi )®
« j=1
¬

(8)

where j ∈ [1, ns ] is the index of inference samples, p j (xi ) is
the classification probability for the given light-curve xi for
each inference sample j, and std is the standard deviation.

4.4.1

Uncertainty evaluation metrics

To evaluate the uncertainty estimates of the BRNNs in SuperNNova, we make use of two metrics:
• Mean model uncertainty: for a given test set Dk , we
average the model uncertainties (b
σ from Eq. 8) over all lightcurves:
N

hb
σk i =

1 Õ
b
σi .
N

(9)

i=1

where i ∈ [1, N] is the index of each light-curve in test set
Dk .
For two given sets of predictions, we can compute the
difference between their uncertainties as:
∆hb
σ1,2 i = hb
σ1 i − hb
σ2 i.

(10)

where b
σi is defined in Equation 9 for a set of predictions i.
• Entropy: we follow Fortunato et al. (2017) and define,
for a test dataset Dt : [x1, ...x N ] with N light-curves and a
classification model m, the entropy of Dt under m as:


N
Õ
1
Hm [Dt ] =
.
(11)
pm (yi |xi )log
pm (yi |xi )
i=1

where pm (yi |xi ) is the classification probability given the
light-curve i using model m. Entropy is a proxy for the
MNRAS 000, 1–19 (2018)

model’s confidence on predictions. Thus, confident predictions will yield low entropy. An equivalent per light-curve
entropy can be computed as Hm [Dt ] = N1 Hm [Dt ], where N
is the number of light-curves in a given test set. For two
given set of predictions, we can define the entropy gap ∆H
by:
∆H =

In classification tasks, evaluating the reliability of a model’s
uncertainties is of paramount importance. Following Kendall
& Gal (2017), we split uncertainties into two categories:
aleatoric and epistemic. Aleatoric uncertainties capture the
uncertainties in the input data, e.g. noise or other effects of
data acquisition. Epistemic uncertainties express our ignorance about the model that generated the data. The latter
depends on the network structure and the training set and
therefore can be reduced with more flexible models, as well
as larger and more diverse training sets.
In SuperNNova, we do not model aleatoric uncertainties since those are already included in the dataset (through
simulated flux measurement errors). By casting learning in
a Bayesian framework, we expect to model epistemic uncertainties.
For BRNNs, given a light-curve x we can obtain a set
of predictions p j (x) j=1...ns where the weights are sampled
ns times from the prediction’s posterior. We compute the
model uncertainty for a given light-curve xi as:

11

Hm1 [Dt ] − Hm2 [Dt ]

or = Hm [Dt1 ] − Hm [Dt2 ]. (12)

where the first option evaluates the entropy gap over the
same dataset for two given models (m1, m2 ), and the second
uses the same model to make predictions for two different
data sets (Dt1 , Dt2 ).
4.4.2

Uncertainty evaluation

We now evaluate the uncertainty estimates of the BRNNs
in SuperNNova. Bayesian Neural Networks aim to capture
epistemic uncertainties by putting a prior distribution over
the NN’s weights. Bayesian inference leads to computing a
posterior which represents the set of plausible models, given
the data. As more data is available, we expect these uncertainties to be explained away. To verify this, we make predictions with two models on the same test set. The models
differ only by the number of light-curves used for training.
First, we compute ∆hb
σ i (Eq. 10) between the predictions obtained with a model trained with a small number of
light-curves and one trained with a larger number. We expect this metric to be positive. For the complete dataset we
compute the ∆hb
σ i of models trained with 43% and the whole
training set, ∆hb
σ i = hb
σ0.43 i − hb
σwhole i. We find ∆hb
σ i = 0.005
and 0.007 respectively. We find similar values for the ∆hb
σi
of models trained with half and the salt fitted training set.
Second, we compute the entropy gap defined in Eq. 12
between the same predictions. Since we expect the predictions from the model trained with less light-curves to be
more uncertain than the one from a model trained with
a larger dataset, we should obtain a positive ∆H. We find
for the MC dropout and BBB implementations a positive
∆H > 0.01.
Both BRNNs implementations have uncertainties which
are consistent with the behavior expected of epistemic uncertainties as shown by the metrics computed above. However,
we find that the size of uncertainties differ in both methods. If we compute the mean of the classification uncertainties when classifying the complete dataset, we find that the
MC dropout implementation has uncertainties twice larger
than the BBB implementation. This may be due to initialization effects or more fundamental effects due to the way
each method specifies variational distributions. Future research should strive to improve the comprehension of these
uncertainty estimates.
In the following Section, we will further study the behavior of our BRNNs uncertainties. In particular, we will
explore the effect of non-representative training sets and the
classification of out-of-distribution light-curves.

5

TOWARDS COSMOLOGY AND OTHER
STATISTICAL ANALYSES

To perform statistical analyses using photometrically classified supernovae, a high accuracy algorithm is not enough. It

12

Möller & de Boissière

Figure 6. Classification of simulated type IIL1 SN as type Ia SN
with seven-way MC dropout RNN. The model was trained without redshift information. Predictions for this light-curve have low
confidence and have large uncertainties (shadowed regions show
68% and 95% contours). The large uncertainties on the classification probability are representing the lack of confidence in this
classification and are correlated to the low S/N.

is equally important to show that it is statistically sound. By
that, we mean that it should provide well calibrated probabilities and capture the epistemic uncertainties related to
the classification model. In the following, we will quantify
the performance of our algorithms with respect to these requirements focusing on the Ia vs. non Ia classification task.

5.1

Calibration

Classification probabilities should reflect the real likelihood
of events being correctly assigned to a target. Classification algorithms where this is true are said to be calibrated.
Niculescu-Mizil & Caruana (2005) show that common machine learning algorithms such as SVMs and boosted trees do
not predict well calibrated probabilities, pushing predicted
probabilities away from 0 and 1. For other algorithms such
as Random Forest, the calibration is heavily data dependent. Recently, Guo et al. (2017) showed that modern, deep
neural networks also suffer from poor calibration and that
there is a trade-off between classification performance and
calibration.
To analyze our algorithms’ calibration, we use reliability
diagrams (DeGroot & Fienberg 1983). These diagrams are
constructed by discretizing the predicted probability into ten
evenly spaced bins. A predicted probability between 0.0 and
0.1 falls into the first bin, and so on. For each bin, we plot
the fraction of true positive cases against the mean predicted
probability in that bin. The fraction of true positive cases in
the binary classification is defined by the number of type Ia
supernovae in that probability bin with respect to all supernovae in that bin. If the model is well calibrated, the points
will fall near the diagonal line. This is equivalent to saying
that in a sample with a hundred events classified as type
Ia with probability 0.7, we expect 70% of events to be true
SNe Ia and 30% to be missclassified SNe from other types.

Furthermore, we construct a metric to study the calibration deviation: the difference between the two calibrations
squared.
For the Random Forest algorithm, we find a large calibration deviation when classifying the SALT2 fitted dataset,
as can be seen in Figure 7. Over five randomized runs the
level of dispersion is found to be 0.025 ± 0.002. In this classification task, RNNs are found to have better calibration
than the Random Forest algorithm with a dispersion an order of magnitude lower. For BBB and MC dropout RNNs
we construct reliability diagrams using multiple predictions
per sample, rather than the median prediction. We find that
diagrams built this way exhibit better calibration than those
built with a single prediction per sample. This is evidence
that the model has learned meaningful predictive uncertainties since including the complete distribution of probabilities
improves the calibration.
Bayesian RNNs are found to be better calibrated than
the Baseline RNN for both salt fitted and complete datasets.
For the classification of the complete dataset without any
redshift information, we find a calibration dispersion from
the Baseline RNN of 0.006±0.001 which is reduced to 0.004±
0.002 for the MC dropout and to 0.0005±0.0004 for the BBB
implementations.
Calibration depends on the nature and size of the training set. We verify this, by measuring the dispersion for the
Baseline RNN when classifying the SALT2 fitted dataset
without redshift information with data fractions between
{0.2 − 1.0}. For the nature of the training set, we compare
using the whole SALT2 fitted dataset and 0.43 of the complete dataset. We find that the data fraction or nature of the
dataset can change the dispersion up to 50%.
Photometrically classified samples are usually selected
from those events that have a probability larger than a given
threshold. These thresholds are chosen as a compromise between purity and size of the selected sample. However, miscalibration affects the positive fraction of events in each bin,
providing misleading probabilities. To account for large calibration deviation, two approaches may be taken: either to
perform a post-processing recalibration (e.g. Niculescu-Mizil
& Caruana (2005); Guo et al. (2017)) or the difference between the obtained and true probability for each bin can
be used to re-weight obtained probabilities. This will be of
importance for classifier and datasets where large calibration dispersion is observed. We consider our BBB and MC
dropout RNNs to be well calibrated due to deviations less
than one percent.

5.2

Representativeness

To improve generalization, classification algorithms typically
require large and representative training sets. A training
set is called representative if its properties, such as maximum observed brightness, have distributions that resemble
the distributions of the dataset to classify also known as a
test set. Training sets are usually simulated using templates
from spectroscopically followed up supernovae. Current and
past surveys have spectroscopic follow-up strategies designed
to target as many Ia-like objects as possible. These spectroscopically selected samples are therefore not probing the
complete supernovae diversity. In this section, we investigate
MNRAS 000, 1–19 (2018)

SuperNNova: SN Bayesian photometric classification

Figure 7. Calibration of classification algorithms. Top: reliability
diagram showing the calibration for SALT2 fitted dataset classification for a single seed. We use the most accurate configurations for the Random Forest (red circles), Baseline RNN (yellow circles), MC dropout RNN (blue triangles) and BBB RNNs
(purple triangles). Bottom: dispersion from perfectly calibrated
algorithms. Note that the Random Forest algorithm has a large
deviation from perfect calibration while the RNNs are better calibrated than this algorithm with the BBB implementation almost
perfectly calibrated.

the impact of training SuperNNova with non-representative
and representative datasets.
Previous works have discussed the issue of representativeness by comparing the accuracy of an algorithm trained
with a dataset whose size was similar to the test set (Lochner
et al. 2016; Charnock & Moss 2017; Pasquet et al. 2019).
RNN based methods, trained on small datasets, are prone
to over-fitting (Charnock & Moss 2017). Additionally, we
have shown that the performance of our algorithm depends
on the size of the training set (see Figure 3). Thus, it would
not be adequate to use this procedure to evaluate the impact
of representativeness.
Instead, we use the following approach. We select the
SALT2 fitted dataset as an example of non-representative
data. Recall that this dataset contains light-curves successfully fitted by SALT2 and is therefore biased towards lightcurves that look like SNe Ia. As representative data we select the complete dataset which includes all simulated lightcurves ”discovered” by the DES-like survey and pass selection cuts. This sample has larger diversity of light-curves and
is thus a better probe of the full data distribution space. The
distribution of magnitudes and redshifts for both datasets
is shown in Figure 8. To investigate the discrepancy between spectroscopic and photometric samples, we train with
the non-representative dataset and evaluate the classification performance for the test sample in the representative
dataset.
For classification with no redshifts using the Baseline
and Bayesian RNNs we find that the accuracy is reduced
MNRAS 000, 1–19 (2018)

13

Figure 8. Distributions of maximum observed brightness (mag),
in all DES filters (g, i, r, z), and of simulated redshift for SALT2
fitted (left yellow) and complete (right blue) datasets. Maximum
observed brightness is shown for type Ia and non-Ia samples while
simulated redshift is shown for each of the available templates.
Dashed lines show the median and first quartile of the distribution. The complete and SALT2 fitted datasets probe similar
parameter space but have different distributions. This is similar
to what is expected of non-representative samples.

by 1% when trained with a non-representative dataset. Although small, this variation is not within the uncertainties
of our model accuracies.
As discussed in Section 4.4, Bayesian RNNs can capture
epistemic uncertainty which includes the lack of diversity in
the model’s training set. Therefore, we expect a Bayesian
RNN trained on non-representative set (in our case, the full
SALT2 fitted dataset) to be more uncertain than one trained
on a representative set (in our case, a subset of the complete dataset) when evaluating on said representative set.
To quantify this in a rigorous way, we use the two metrics
introduced in Section 4.4.1. We find both metrics to be positive for all BRNNs, ∆hb
σ i > 0.004 and ∆H > 0.01.
The lack of representativity and the limitations of supernova templates are major issues in SN photometric classification. Recently, Ishida et al. (2018) introduced a framework for the optimization of spectroscopic follow-up resources to improve SN photometric classification datasets.
Bayesian RNN uncertainties may be a promising indicator
to select follow-up candidates for this purpose. This is an
interesting possibility which we leave for future work.

5.3

Out of distribution light-curves (OOD)

In astronomy, as in any other classification application, the
generalization properties of a classifier and its behavior on
unseen, possibly out-of-distribution samples represents a
challenge. In this section we study the performance of SuperNNova when classifying out-of-distribution light-curves.
We test four different types of OODs: time reversed lightcurves, randomly shuffled light-curves, random fluxes and a
sinusoidal signal. The latter two were generated using the
same cadence and flux range as normal supernovae. These

14

Möller & de Boissière

light-curves are only used for testing and were not used for
training at any time.
When classifying out-of-distribution light-curves, all SuperNNova algorithms rarely classify these light-curves as
SNe Ia. For binary classification, for the MC dropout and
BBB implementation, the reverse and shuffle light-curves
obtain the largest number of classifications as SNe Ia, 4.8%
and 4.1% respectively with the MC dropout implementation and less than 3% for the BBB. Many of these lightcurves resemble supernovae, specially with light-curves with
low signal-to-noise. For the sinusoidal light-curves, only the
MC dropout classifier classifies a significant percentage as
SNe Ia 5.9%, while for the BBB method this is not the case.
The network seems to characterize type Ia supernovae well
and therefore classifies most OOD events as core-collapse
supernovae as can be seen in Figure 9 with the BBB RNN.
In ternary and seven-way classification the most common
predictions for OOD events are types II: IIn, IIp, IIL1.
To assess how our prediction uncertainties behave with
respect to out-of-distribution events, we compute ∆H for our
best performing models comparing OOD and our complete
data test set predictions. Although ∆H does not measure
uncertainty in an absolute way, it can be used as a qualitative test where OOD events should show high entropy as
seen in Fortunato et al. (2017). For the binary classification
problem, we find positive ∆H for random and reverse lightcurves for both the MC dropout and BBB implementations,
with the BBB having the largest entropy gap. Interestingly,
for sinusoidal and shuffle light-curves this metric is negative
for the MC dropout implementation. For the ternary and
seven-way problems, other OOD predictions are as well negative.While Fortunato et al. (2017) observe large positive
entropy for OOD events, our experiments show surprisingly
a mixed behaviour. We explore this question in Appendix 7
where we conclude that RNNs are at risk of collapse on
predicting a single class with high probability. Additionally,
we show the different behaviours for classification of OOD
events in a seven-way classification in Figure 10.
5.4

Type Ia supernova cosmology

Current and future surveys such as DES, PanSTARRS and
LSST will use photometrically classified type Ia supernovae
for their cosmological analyses. In this section we examine
the properties of type Ia supernova samples classified by
SuperNNova.
To study of the expansion of the Universe, type Ia supernovae are used to measure distance modulus as a function
of redshift. We can compute the distance modulus, µ, of a
given type Ia supernova:
µ = mB + αx1 − βc + M,

(13)

where M is the absolute magnitude of the SNIa, mB is
the rest-frame B magnitude (at peak luminosity), x1 is the
stretch parameter and c is the color. The last three parameters are derived from the SALT2 fit to the observed SN Ia
light curve. M, α and β and can be constrained during cosmological fits. In this work, we will use the simulated values:
M = 19.365, α = 0.144 and β = 3.1.
With SuperNNova, we obtain a photometrically classified type Ia supernovae sample by selecting light-curves that
have a probability larger than 0.5 to be type Ia. Importantly,

Figure 9. Predicted classification percentages for best configuration BBB RNN with single seed. Columns indicate number
of targets for the classification (with probabilities summing one)
and an additional column indicating a low probability prediction,
< 0.6, 0.4, 0.2 for 2, 3 and 7 classes respectively. Rows represent
the different light-curve types. All rows are out-of-distribution
generated light-curves except the row “SNe” representing our testing dataset. Since the testing set has balanced classes, we expect
the prediction percentage in the row “SNe” to be balanced as
well. Note that the out-of-distribution events are rarely classified
as type Ia SNe (< 2.6% binary, < 1.8% ternary and < 0.6% in
seven-way classification), the highest percentages in binary classification are for OOD which can resemble SNe light-curves, e.g.
reverse and shuffle. In ternary and seven-way classification, outof-distribution events are preferably classified as type II, IIn or
IIL1 SNe. Note that the number of low probability detections are
much higher for OOD when classifying in three or seven classes.

we have shown in Section 5.3 that out-of-distribution lightcurves are rarely classified as type Ia SNe for any of our
algorithms. We do not correct calibration deviations found
in Section 5.1 given the small miscalibration found which
will have a minor effect on the photometrically selected SN
Ia sample population which is assessed in this Section.
For each supernova in the photometrically selected sample, we obtain its distance modulus using Equation 13 and
compare it with the ΛCDM distance modulus corresponding
to that simulated redshift. This is called the Hubble Residual and ideally should be around zero. We show the Hubble
Residual for a sample classified with the best-performing
BBB RNN without redshift information in Figure 11 for
both correctly classified type Ia supernovae and incorrectly
classified core-collapse supernovae. The contribution by the
MNRAS 000, 1–19 (2018)

SuperNNova: SN Bayesian photometric classification

15

miss-classified core-collapse SNe by a factor of four and only
reducing the correctly classified SN Ia by < 5%.
Uncertainties from Bayesian RNN’s may provide useful
information to discard supernovae in cosmology analyses.
They may be incorporated to the analysis of photometric
samples with Bayesian Hierarchical Cosmology models such
as Steve (Hinton et al. 2018). As a first toy approach, we discard those SNe classified with uncertainties larger than 0.05
in the Hubble Diagram, finding a similar decrease in the
number of core-collapse SNe as raising the threshold to 0.9.
The number of TP SNe Ia are also equivalent. This shows
that uncertainties are a good indicator for possible contamination. A more robust study on the impact of selection by
classification probabilities and uncertainties is left for future
work.
Finally, we examine the population properties of our SuperNNova selected sample when compared to its parent population as can be seen in Figures 11 and 12. In spectroscopically selected samples, there is a large difference between
its properties and the ones of the expected supernovae population. This is mainly due to spectroscopic selection effects
(Kessler et al. 2018; D’Andrea et al. 2018). In our photometrically classified sample using no redshift information, we see
almost constant selection efficiency throughout redshift. Importantly, color and stretch distributions match very closely
the parent population. Asides from this selection bias reduction, we are able to classify type Ia supernovae at redshifts
> 0.9 which is extremely difficult when using spectroscopy.

6

Figure 10. Out-of-distribution and SN light-curve prediction distribution for best MC dropout configuration without redshift information for seven-way classification. First column depict lightcurves, second column their classification probabilities for different supernova classes depicted with various line styles and colors.
First four rows show SNe light-curves while last four rows are outof-distribution events. For the OOD events we see different behaviours: high classification probabilities for a certain supernova
class with large uncertainties, clustered classification probabilities
around a small value and a mixture of both behaviours.

latter represents less than 5% of the sample and peaks at
redshifts between 0.4 − 0.5.
Such contamination can be reduced by: using additional
information such as host-galaxy redshifts, raising the probability threshold for sample selection as shown in Figure 11
or eliminating classified events with large uncertainties. We
have shown that adding redshifts allows us to obtain a sample contaminated by < 2% core-collapse SNe, contamination which is within the range of current spectroscopically
classified samples (Rubin et al. 2015). Raising the probability threshold is found to be a good alternative, e.g. for
the MC dropout implementation, setting the threshold to
> 0.9 increases the sample purity by reducing the number of
MNRAS 000, 1–19 (2018)

SUPERNNOVA RESOURCES

SuperNNova has been optimized for a reasonable computing budget and special care has been dedicated to memory
consumption. For this project we used an 8-core Intel(R)
Core(TM) i7-7700K CPU (4.20GHz) with 15GB of RAM
and an NVIDIA GeForce 1080Ti GPU to speed up training
and inference.
Database construction, which includes formatting and
normalization, is carried out once for the whole dataset and
requires less than half an hour. For a given model, training can be carried out on the CPU or, if available, on the
GPU. We quote speeds for a batch size of 128, larger batch
sizes will result in a decrease of training time. Similarly, we
quote times for training with cyclic learning rate, without
cyclic training times increase. For the Baseline RNN we find
that training a single epoch with approximately 5, 000 lightcurves ranges from 1 minute (GPU) to 10 minutes (CPU).
Training the Baseline RNN to convergence requires from one
and a half hours (GPU) to 15 hours (CPU). For the same
light-curve numbers per epoch, MC dropout RNNs require
slightly longer to train with 1.5 minutes (GPU), while BBB
RNNs require 2 minutes per epoch (GPU).
Once a model is trained, it can be applied to classify independent light-curve samples. SuperNNova is able to
classify tenths to hundreds of light-curves per second with
BRNNs as can be seen in Table 4. This includes sampling 50
times the probability distribution (50 being the number of
inference samples). For the Baseline RNN (using either GPU
and CPU) we are able to classify thousands of light-curves
per second. Inference speed will be critical given the unprecedented amounts of data expected from upcoming transient

16

Möller & de Boissière

Figure 11. Hubble Residuals as a function of simulated redshift for the photometrically classified SN Ia sample using our
best performing BBB RNN trained with the complete dataset
with no redshift information. Top left: Hubble Residuals for correctly classified type Ia supernovae (TP) as a function of simulate redshift. Colors correspond to classification probabilities
smoothly distributed between 0.5 (yellow) and 0.9 (dark orange).
Top right: normalized histogram of Hubble Residual for three
selection thresholds: 0.5 (yellow), 0.7 (orange) and 0.9 (dark orange). Center left and right: same plots as above but for incorrectly classified core-collapse which represent the sample contamination. Bottom from left to right: redshift, color (c) and stretch
(x1) distributions of the complete simulated Ia sample (black), selected TP at different probability thresholds (colored continuous
lines) and selected FP (dashed lines). We plot only the supernovae
classified as type Ia that have had a successful SALT2 fit which
provides parameters necessary to compute the distance modulus. Note the small difference between the simulated and selected
redshift, color and stretch distributions and the contamination
contribution < 5%. Clearly, such photometric sample significantly
reduces selection biases usually seen in spectroscopically selected
samples.

surveys. Thus, SuperNNova paves the way towards real-time
light-curve classification.

7

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

We have presented SuperNNova, a fast and accurate framework for photometric classification. SuperNNova only requires light-curves as input. Additional information, such
as host-galaxy redshifts, can be easily incorporated to improve its performance. We have released the source code on
github alongside with extensive documentation, tests sets
and a docker environment to foster exploration and reproducibility 5 .

5

https://github.com/supernnova/SuperNNova

Figure 12. Hubble Residuals as a function of simulated redshift
for the photometrically classified SN Ia sample using our best
performing BBB RNN with photometric host-galaxy redshift information. Figure is similar to 11. Note that the level of contamination obtained in this sample is less than 2% which is equivalent
to that expected of spectroscopically classified samples. As in the
previous Figure, our selected sample probes almost completely
the whole redshift, color and stretch parent population.

Table 4. Classification speeds for batch sizes of 128 light-curves.
For each RNN model we measure how many supernovae per second can be classified using either CPU or GPU.
RNN model

Number of SNe per second

device

Baseline
Baseline
MC dropout
MC dropout
BBB
BBB

23,280
2,820
342
58
264
56

GPU
CPU
GPU
CPU
GPU
CPU

Current and future surveys will continue to discover
a larger number of transients than they are able to spectroscopically characterize. Photometric classification will be
key to harness the full power of these surveys, both for optimizing follow-up resources and for obtaining larger and
more diverse samples than those that can be spectroscopically classified.
SuperNNova is able to achieve large and high purity
SN samples. We have shown that it has high performance
in the classification of type Ia vs. non type Ia supernovae
with accuracies up to 95% for whole light-curves. When hostgalaxy information is provided, accuracies increase to 98%.
SuperNNova can be used in various classification tasks such
as ternary and seven-way classification. For these classification tasks, accuracies are found to be above 90% when
host-galaxy information is provided. By selecting photometric samples, SuperNNova allows the exploration and characterization of diverse astrophysical objects.
MNRAS 000, 1–19 (2018)

SuperNNova: SN Bayesian photometric classification
With the advent of large surveys discovering thousands
of transients every night, it will be imperative to prioritize follow-up using partial light-curve classification. SuperNNova achieves unprecedented accuracy on this particularly challenging task. Our results show that we are capable
of discriminating Ia and non-Ia supernova light-curves before their maximum peak with accuracies up to 86% without
redshift information and higher than 90% when host-galaxy
redshifts are provided. Classification becomes harder when
classifying into many targets (3 to 7), with accuracies only
reaching around 63% near maximum light. For this classification task, the addition of host-galaxy redshifts can yield to
accuracy improvements as high as 10 points. Besides accuracy, inference speed is another key concern. With SuperNNova, we set a strong baseline: our algorithm is capable of
classifying thousands of light-curves per second.
Neural networks and other machine learning algorithms
have been successfully applied to astrophysical analyses but
their statistical properties have rarely been analyzed in detail. In this work, we devise tests to estimate the robustness of classification algorithms. We show that calibration
depends on the choice of algorithm and dataset and emphasize the need for calibration diagnosis. We find that our
RNNs are better calibrated than a Random Forest algorithm
applied to the same dataset.
In SuperNNova, we adopt a Bayesian view of neural networks, showing much improved uncertainty estimates, calibration and out of sample behavior over standard neural
networks. We have shown that the uncertainties obtained
with our BRNNs reflect the confidence of predictions and
exhibit the behaviour expected for epistemic uncertainties.
One of the main goals of SuperNNova is to obtain photometrically classified type Ia supernovae. Current large surveys such as DES and PanSTARRS are already exploring
methods to obtain cosmological constraints from such samples (Jones et al. 2018). Accounting for the effect of large
contamination expected in photometric samples, is one of
the major limitations of these analyses. With SuperNNova
we can achieve a contamination of < 2%, equivalent to that
of current spectroscopically classified samples (Rubin et al.
2015).
Furthermore, using photometrically classified supernovae in statistical analyses requires a thorough understanding of classification reliability and the limitations of the
available training samples. We have shown that our Bayesian
RNNs are reliable, well calibrated and provide meaningful
uncertainty estimates. These uncertainties can be used in
existing cosmology frameworks to obtain cosmological constraints (Hinton et al. 2018) or follow-up optimization frameworks to improve supernova templates (Ishida et al. 2018).
We have made initial assessments on the selection biases in a photometrically classified type Ia supernova sample
with SuperNNova, finding a higher selection efficiency and
a better population sampling when compared with spectroscopically classified supernovae in the recent DES analysis
(Kessler et al. 2018). Importantly, we have shown that outof-distribution, random and sinusoidal shaped light-curves
are mostly rejected from our photometrically classified SN
Ia sample.
SuperNNova has been designed with supernova lightcurve classification in mind, however it can be easily adapted
to other time-domain astronomy classification problems.
MNRAS 000, 1–19 (2018)

17

E.g. the classification of other transients such as kilonovae,
variable stars and a wider variety of supernovae classes. We
expect to continue applying SuperNNova and improving it
to a wide variety of classification problems.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank: Richard Scalzo and Chris Lidman for their
feedback on this manuscript, Samuel Hinton for testing
the framework, Rick Kessler for help with simulations and
Alex Kim, Wade Blanchard and Robert Clark for useful
statistics discussions.
Parts of this research were conducted by the Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for All-sky Astrophysics
(CAASTRO), through project number CE110001020.

REFERENCES
Astier P., et al., 2006, Astron.Astrophys., 447, 31
Astropy Collaboration et al., 2013, A&A, 558, A33
Bahdanau D., Cho K., Bengio Y., 2014, preprint,
(arXiv:1409.0473)
Bazin G., Ruhlmann-Kleider V., Palanque-Delabrouille N., Rich
J., Aubourg E., et al., 2011, Astron.Astrophys., 534, A43
Bellm
E.
C.,
2018,
preprint,
p.
arXiv:1802.10218
(arXiv:1802.10218)
Bernstein J. P., et al., 2012, Astrophys. J., 753, 152
Betoule M., et al., 2014, Astron.Astrophys., 568, A22
Blundell C., Cornebise J., Kavukcuoglu K., Wierstra D., 2015,
preprint, (arXiv:1505.05424)
Campbell H., et al., 2013, ApJ, 763, 88
Carrasco-Davis R., et al., 2018, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:1807.03869
Charnock T., Moss A., 2017, ApJ, 837, L28
Chung J., Gulcehre C., Cho K., Bengio Y., 2014, preprint, p.
arXiv:1412.3555 (arXiv:1412.3555)
D’Andrea C. B., et al., 2018, preprint, p. arXiv:1811.09565
(arXiv:1811.09565)
Dai M., Kuhlmann S., Wang Y., Kovacs E., 2018, MNRAS, 477,
4142
DeGroot M. H., Fienberg S. E., 1983, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series D (The Statistician), 32, 12
Foley R. J., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 475, 193
Fortunato M., Blundell C., Vinyals O., 2017, preprint, p.
arXiv:1704.02798 (arXiv:1704.02798)
Frieman J. A., et al., 2008, AJ, 135, 338
Gal Y., Ghahramani Z., 2015a, preprint, (arXiv:1512.05287)
Gal Y., Ghahramani Z., 2015b, preprint, p. arXiv:1506.02142
(arXiv:1506.02142)
Gieseke F., et al., 2017, MNRAS, 472, 3101
González-Gaitán S., et al., 2011, ApJ, 727, 107
Guo C., Pleiss G., Sun Y., Weinberger K. Q., 2017, preprint,
(arXiv:1706.04599)
Gupta R. R., et al., 2016, AJ, 152, 154
Guy J., et al., 2007, A&A, 466, 11
Hinton S. R., et al., 2018, preprint, (arXiv:1811.02381)
Hlozek R., et al., 2012, ApJ, 752, 79
Hochreiter S., Schmidhuber J., 1997, Neural Comput., 9, 1735
Hunter J. D., 2007, Computing In Science & Engineering, 9, 90
Ishida, E. E. O. and de Souza, R. S. 2013, MNRAS, 430, 509
Ishida E. E. O., et al., 2018, MNRAS,
Jones D. O., et al., 2018, ApJ, 857, 51

18

Möller & de Boissière

Kalchbrenner N., et al., 2018, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1802.08435
Kendall A., Gal Y., 2017, preprint, (arXiv:1703.04977)
Kessler R., et al., 2009, PASP, 121, 1028
Kessler R., Conley A., Jha S., Kuhlmann S., 2010a, preprint,
(arXiv:1001.5210)
Kessler R., et al., 2010b, Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac., 122, 1415
Kessler R., et al., 2018, preprint, (arXiv:1811.02379)
Kimura A., Takahashi I., Tanaka M., Yasuda N., Ueda
N., Yoshida N., 2017, preprint, p. arXiv:1711.11526
(arXiv:1711.11526)
Kingma D. P., Ba J., 2014, preprint, (arXiv:1412.6980)
Kuznetsova N. V., Connolly B. M., 2007, ApJ, 659, 530
LSST Science Collaboration Abell P. A., Allison J., Anderson
2009, preprint, p. arXiv:0912.0201 (arXiv:0912.0201)
Lanusse F., Ma Q., Li N., Collett T. E., Li C.-L., Ravanbakhsh
S., Mandelbaum R., Póczos B., 2018, MNRAS, 473, 3895
LeCun Y., Cortes C., 2010
Lecun Y., Bottou L., Bengio Y., Haffner P., 1998, in Proceedings
of the IEEE. pp 2278–2324
Lochner M., McEwen J. D., Peiris H. V., Lahav O., Winter M. K.,
2016, ApJS, 225, 31
McKinney W., 2010, in van der Walt S., Millman J., eds, Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference. pp 51 –
56
Mehri S., Kumar K., Gulrajani I., Kumar R., Jain S., Sotelo J.,
Courville A., Bengio Y., 2016, preprint, (arXiv:1612.07837)
Möller A., et al., 2016, Journal of Cosmology and Astro-Particle
Physics, 2016, 008
Moss A., 2018, preprint, (arXiv:1810.06441)
Narayan G., et al., 2018, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement
Series, 236, 9
Niculescu-Mizil A., Caruana R., 2005, in Proceedings of
the 22Nd International Conference on Machine Learning. ICML ’05. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp 625–
632, doi:10.1145/1102351.1102430, http://doi.acm.org/10.
1145/1102351.1102430
Pasquet J., Pasquet J., Chaumont M., Fouchez D., 2019, arXiv
e-prints, p. arXiv:1901.01298
Paszke A., et al., 2017
Pedregosa F., et al., 2011, Journal of machine learning research,
12, 2825
Poznanski D., Maoz D., Gal-Yam A., 2007, AJ, 134, 1285
Rubin D., et al., 2015, ApJ, 813, 137
Sako M., et al., 2011, ApJ, 738, 162
Smith L. N., 2018, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1803.09820
Sutskever I., Vinyals O., Le Q. V., 2014, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:1409.3215
The
Astropy
Collaboration
et
al.,
2018,
preprint,
(arXiv:1801.02634)
The PLAsTiCC team et al., 2018, preprint, (arXiv:1810.00001)
Van Der Walt S., Colbert S. C., Varoquaux G., 2011, preprint, p.
arXiv:1102.1523 (arXiv:1102.1523)
Vasquez S., Lewis M., 2019, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1906.01083
Waskom
M.,
et
al.,
2018,
Seaborn
v0.9.0,
doi:10.5281/zenodo.1313201,
https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.1313201

APPENDIX: REPRODUCIBILITY
To validate our code, we have independently reproduced
the results of (Gal & Ghahramani 2015b,a; Fortunato et al.
2017) on a language modelling task and made the code public on GitHub.

Figure 1. A standard feedforward network on MNIST. On the
first and third column, images show the input given to the network. The classification probabilities for each target are given as
histograms in the second and third columns.

APPENDIX: BEHAVIOUR OF OOD IN MNIST
To better understand the behaviour of Bayesian Neural
Networks, we carried out two experiments on the MNIST
dataset (LeCun & Cortes 2010). This dataset contains images of handwritten digits.
First, we trained three (respectively standard, MC
dropout and BBB) feedforward networks to classify flattened digit images into one of ten classes, each representing
a digit between 0 and 9. To evaluate performance on outof-distribution data, we asked the network to carry out predictions on rotated digits, as well as completely randomized
images. In Figure 1, we show the predictions for the standard feedforward network where we see it remains confident
about its prediction (the maximum of the predicted probability remains relatively high) for rotated images as well as
random images. For MC dropout and BBB networks, we observe a much more interesting behaviour (Figures 2 and 3).
When the rotation is small, the network behaves in much
the same way as a non bayesian one and gives max probability with very little variance to the correct class. However,
as the rotation increases, the variance of the prediction increases significantly. Clearly then, the network is uncertain
about the correct class, but the fact that it still sometimes
assigns a high score to one of the classes indicates that it
believes the image bears some similarity to the data which
it was trained on. This behaviour is in contrast with that
on random images: the predicted probabilities are all concentrated to the left, with very little variance: the network
is confident that it does not know how to predict this image. This is the expected behaviour for out-of-distribution
samples which yields a large entropy.
Second, we trained three recurrent neural networks (respectively standard, MC dropout and BBB), similar to the
ones used in SuperNNova, to carry out the same task. The
digit images were treated as a sequence, with the rows as
the time steps and the columns as input features. The standard network behaves in much the same way as its feedforward counterpart (Figure 4) and makes even more confident predictions on the random and rotated images. For
bayesian recurrent networks, we found that it was harder
to obtain desirable OOD behaviour as exhibited by the
bayesian feed-forward networks, and that extensive parameter tuning was required. The MC dropout and BBB networks
(Figures 5 and 6) show, as before, an increased variance
MNRAS 000, 1–19 (2018)

SuperNNova: SN Bayesian photometric classification

Figure 2. An MC Dropout feedforward network on MNIST.

19

Figure 4. A recurrent network on MNIST. This RNN is able to
obtain similar prediction behaviour as Figure 1 which is what is
expected for OOD events.

Figure 3. A Bayesian By Backprop feedforward network on
MNIST.

in the prediction probabilities for random images. However,
the behaviour on random data differs significantly. The MC
dropout network seems to have collapsed on predicting a single class with high probability while the bayesian network
exhibits large variance for multiple classes.
While we have verified that tuning the various hyperparameters improves the uncertainty performance on this
qualitative examination, it is clear that the behaviour of
Bayesian recurrent networks should be critically analyzed:
the network remains at risk to collapse its predictions when
fed with unrelated data. This sheds light on the negative ∆H
found in Section 5.3: for OOD data, which looks nothing like
the training data, the network likely collapses and outputs
a prediction with very high certainty, giving a very low entropy score to the out of sample data. We note that this is
possibly exacerbated by the type of data used to train the
network: supernova fluxes indeed exhibit variations spanning multiple orders of magnitude which leads to persisting
artifacts even after normalization. Future work will focus on
characterizing this phenomenon and developing methods to
improve robustness on out-of-distribution data.
This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by
the author.

MNRAS 000, 1–19 (2018)

Figure 5. An MC Dropout recurrent network on MNIST. This
network collapses and outputs high-certainty predictions for OOD
images.

Figure 6. A Bayesian By Backprop recurrent network on
MNIST. This network collapses and outputs high-certainty predictions for OOD images.

